is called a national consciousness. There was barely enough of
this to save the day against the indifference of the particularists
of the North and the opposition of the secessionists of the South.
The little flame of national sentiment had to be nursed and coaxed
by the persuasive force and mnagnetic personality of the greatest
of all popular leaders.

A distinguished sentimentalist, who can scarcely be dignified by
the name of moralist, has recently said before a large body of
laboring men in New York that even in case of a military invasion
of this country the laboring men would have no interest at stake
and no motive for supporting a defensive war. Quoting the Communist
Manifesto, she exclaimed that the laboring men had "nothing
to lose but their chains." Anyone who believes that believes
that laboring men are swine, that they have no interest beyond
a full belly and a short working day,-that they have no souls.
I refuse to believe it.

If one begins the inquiry as to how incomes and dinner-pails
would be affected by foreign domination, why stop with the laboring
men? They certainly lhave as much to lose as any other class.
Suppose that we were to submit quietly to foreign occupancy, and
the taking over of the government at Washington by a foreign
power, who among us would suffer any diminution of income or of
consumers' satisfactions? It is unlikely that our business men
would suffer as a class. In fact, there is no foreign government
which is strong enough to attempt a conquest which does not treat
business men quite as well as our government, which does not protect
life and property and repress mob violence rather more effectively
than our government is in the habit of doing.
Again, so far as the economic self-interest of those now before
me is concerned, it is difficult to see how you as a class would be
economically injured if another government sent an army and took
possession of our capital and ran its machinery. In any country
which is strong enough to attempt such a thing, scholarship stands
higher, and scholars are better treated, than in this country. If
you have no interest beyond your own incomes and consumers'
satisfactions, why should any of you bestir yourselves to repel
an invasion? And yet, with this argument fully in mind, I venture
to say that at least ninety-nine out of a hundred, even of your
class, would bestir themselves and make considerable sacrifices to
prevent such a thing from happening. The hundredth, if there be
one, would be about as popular as a copperhead was in the North