in a field in which education had been sadly neglected and in which
it was not likely to be developed within any time which men could
foresee, unless the federal government gave this aid.
The same thing is today a strategic move, namely, we should
ask for this money from the federal government for the purpose of
developing the practical side of education in our elementary and
secondary schools. It should be strictlv a supplemental grant,
in aid of this work, not an attempt to assume the responsibility
of its entire support.
There is little doubt that if such a grant were made it would
stimulate the development of elementary and secondary education
along the lines thus far suggested, in a remarkable way and with
more astonishing results than have been accomplished in the field
of higher education. To accomplish this result of stimulation,
it is not necessary that the federal government should assume
the entire burden, or that it should do more than pay the comparatively
small part of what would ultimately be its share of the
expense.
One other objection, of course, to this kind of proposition
is very commonly made and occurs to everyone. Will not such a
scheme as this strengthen enormously the tendencies which are
making for centralization in the United States? Will it not
strengthen greatly the power of the federal government and diminish
still more the activity and energy and initiative of the commonwealths
themselves?
The proposition is that this money be given to the states to be
expended by them for this purpose. Of course it would be necessary
to utilize that amount of federal-I will not call it supervision
for it is not that-but federal bookkeeping which would
make sure that this money given for this purpose should be used
by the states for the purpose for which it is given. Otherwise
it should be left entirely to the states to manage, as the law has
left it to the states to determine the manner in which the funds
shall be expended which were granted for the colleges of agriculture
and the mechanic arts.
That such a measure would enlarge the view of the federal
government, so to speak; that it would bring into the range of
federal thought and federal activity the subject of education in a
large way, there is no doubt; and that is one of the strongest
arguments in its favor. If this appropriation of federal funds
in aid of elementary and secondary education were incidentally to