pork-barrel theory of government threatens governmental bankruptcy
by diverting the benefits of national taxation and low rates
of interest into further increased values of local real estate.
Already certain reclamation projects have pushed up the investment
values of land and burdened the actual settler with fixed
charges which drive him in turn to demand relief, not of the speculator
who has benefited, but of the government that has advanced
the capital. In these reclamation cases there was no theory of
value to guide the engineers who laid out the projects. Almost
the entire increase in value which the government added to the
property went to the speculative owners instead of to the actual
farmers. And now the government is asked to forego even its
low rate of interest, and perhaps the principal itself, so that the
farmer can make a living after having paid the speculator. The
alternative is bankruptcy for the farmer or more taxes for the
people.
Likewise with the subsidies to rural highways. In every state
we see the unseemly struggle between localities to get hold of this
state and federal taxing power which gives a special and permanent
benefit to local real estate. Had the special-benefit theory
been adopted, then the states and federal government would first
decide what highways are needed in the public interest and then
require the benefited property to refund the expense, to the extent
of the benefit.
More serious is the case of railways. The weightiest objection
to the government ownership of railways is the dreaded scramble
in Congress to get local extensions, terminals, and new lines
whether needed or not by the nation as a whole. The imagination
is stunned by the possibilities of logrolling and national bankruptcy
from this source, if the government owns the railways.
But with the doctrine of special benefits, namely, that the benefited
property of each locality and not the taxes of the nation should
be required to pay the expenses of permanent irnprovements, the
government might advance on a policy of public ownership without
fear that local private interests would logroll the general
public interest. Indeed, here again, as in the case of government
subsidies for rural credit, for reclamation and for highways, the
special-benefit theory is a specific against the fatty degeneracy of
the pork-barrel theory. The inducement to logroll for special
benefits is reduced if those who get the benefit are required to pay
for it.