My proposition is very simple: that the federal government
shall grant to each state in the Union a sum of money equal to one
dollar per annum per head of its population for the support of
elementary and secondary education, that is, for the common
schools; and that this money shall be expended for the purpose
of strengthening what, for lack of a better term, we may call
"practical" education, that is, in agriculture, the mechanic arts,
the trades, domestic science, commerce and business, etc.
This would represent a contribution from the federal treasury
toward the support of elementary and secondary education of
approximately one hundred million dollars a year,-less than the
amount given to the building of a navy, far less than the amount
given to general military purposes, a sum which many people
would think so small as compared with the expense of such an
educational system as this that it would hardly be effective in a
large way.

Now the objections to a proposed grant of this kind are
obvious and potent. That they are really potent is evident enough
by the fact that in spite of more or less discussion of this subject
for fifty years past we have not yet made any verv great progress
toward bringing it to pass. The first argument which naturally
suggests itself is that education is not a federal function. If by
this is meant that the constitution of the United States does not
mention the support of elementary and secondary education as
one of the functions of the federal government, there would be,
of course, no discussion. If, however, is meant that this is not
properly a function of the federal government, that is surely
begging the question, since that is one of the points to be established.
I think the argument which I have made as to its necessity
for the national welfare, as to the national benefit from the
education of every individual child along the lines I have suggested,
and the impossibility of securing the benefits of this
education to the communities which have had to bear the expense,
is a satisfactory answer.

It may be said, moreover, that the federal government from the
very beginning of its existence has looked upon education as in
a peculiar sense something which the federal power must, within
the limits within which it was content to act, have a special regard
for. You will remember the famous declaration involved in the
ordinance of 1787 in which Congress declared that the promotion
of education was one of the fundamental purposes of government.