principles? The second is: Granted that we should serve, exactly
whom should we serve?
To the first of these questions the radicals have, in my opinion,
given the better answer. Even the economic recluse selects, if he
can, some theme related to human affairs and fondly hopes that
his work may be taken up and utilized by practical men. It must
be admitted, however, that most economists even yet depend too
much on books and official reports and too little on personally
feeling the pulse of real events.
But it is the second question which most needs our attention
today: Whom are we to serve? To this, I believe, the conservatives
have given the better answer.
Economics may be applied for the benefit of the whole world
or for the benefit of one country alone. Again, within a country,
economics may be applied for the general good or for a
special commercial interest, special class, or special locality.
I have referred to the curiously interesting fact that this Association
largely owes its birth to German economics. Undoubtedly
German economics brought us a new and altruistic impulse.
In particular we received from Germany the idea, close to the
heart of every German economist, of making economics of service
to "the state."
But in the last two years the war's revelations have made us
realize, to our horror, that "tthe state" served by the German
economists, or, at any rate, the German economists of today, was
simply the Hohenzollern dynasty. We now know that German
professors in general, from theologian to chemist, have prostituted
their professional services to serve Germany's criminal purposes.
Frederick Scott Oliver in his "Ordeal by Battle" called the
professors the "Priestcraft" throuigh whom the German Governnent
indoctrinatedl the German people. Professor Emnery called
the war a war of the economic interpretation of history. Others
have called it a professors' war and especially an economic professor'
s' war. Some among the very group of German teachers
who stirred the enthusiasm out of which this Association grew, and
more among their successors, in their service of "the state," lhelped
to lay the foundation for the war. That foundation, or the part
of it which they helped to lay, was a predatory economics, the
economics of a beast of prey, the economics of loot by war. In
this species of economics, property rights had existence onNr
within the state, not between states.