inating in the sense that they formally control, but dominating in
the sense that the whole social and educational and industrial
policy must turn around them, and reckon with the facts of their
intellectual and moral development.
The industrial training of the Southern negro is one of the
fundamnental national needs of this great country. But it isn't
a thing which inerely concerns Louisiana or Alabama or Georgia
or Carolina. It is something which affects the interest of every
part of this great nation.
Owing to social conditions it is necessary for the South to
provide two entirely different, distinct, though parallel, educa-
tionial systems. Now it is simply impossible for the Southern
people to provide two efficient systems of education. The burden
is too great. The nation ought not to ask it of it. The nation
ought to insist that this problem be taken up and solved, but it
ought to be willing to help bear the burden of its solution.
But aside from the negroes, I think it is also safe to say that
there is no population of equal promise, of equal abilities, so
devoid of educational facilities in any large civilized country as
are the mountain whites along the Appalachian Mountain chain,
and into the valleys and over the mountains of that great region.
Here is a popul.-,Ji n of extraordinary value from an industrial
poinit of view, if it were made available for national development.
The men whom these people have contributed to the life of America
are an illustration of the wonderful stores of unused ability
uipon which the nation has not drawn at all. It would be a good
investment for the United States of America as a nation to put
tat national expense into this region an efficient educational system,
even if the states concerned did not contribute a single dollar to it.
The educational condition of the Southern negro, the educational
condition of certain portions of the Southern whites, is a
reproach to the American nation.
But these two striking cases do not by any means exhaust the
illustrations of my proposition. In manv respects, in spite of
all our great development, in spite of our growth, of which we
may be proud, we are still lagging behind not only our own
possibilities, but the actual achievements of other nations. The
rural schools over a large extent of the wealthy Northern States
are taught by a more uneducated and a more inexperienced class
of teachers than would be accepted as satisfactory instructors of
the young either in England, France, or Germany. And even if