from having one accepted by any reputable magazine that makes
effective presentation a test of acceptance.
To outline a program for the reform of economic studies is too
large a task for a presidential address, yet some of its principles
are so evident that the address would lose point without them.
We have consciously tried to create graduate schools of economics
and have failed, yet our work has in an unplanned blundering
way passed over into the undergraduate world and succeeded.
The reason for this is that with undergraduates we have been
forced to cultivate clearness of thought and have thus found a fitting
field for our activities. Reform in the graduate schools means
a like transformation. They must be changed from schools of
acquisition to schools of exprossion. The ideal graduate school
is a school of journalism just as the ideal undergraduate school
is one fitting men for business. We will never make a graduate
school of business, try as we may, but we can create a school of
economic expression that trains men for teaching, magazine writing
and journalism. A good debater is a better economist than
a writer of theses and to have won an intercollegiate debate should
count more than library work. Every economist should seek for
journalistic experience and have his standing measured by his
success. No economist is an economist until he has said to himself,
" I wish I were an editor. "
If this be true the complement for graduate economics is not
history, politics and sociology but literature and law. We should
be grouped with other social sciences when teaching undergraduates
but we should sharply isolate ourselves from them in graduate
work. Our fundamental needs are for the power of expression
and the spirit of legality. Economists are by education and tradition
revolutionists. The Lord made the world in seven days;
we want to remake it in one. So we join hands with anarchists,
socialists and other advocates of violent change and cry ourselves
hoarse in advancing their measures. Economics is like a South
American republic; no one is satisfied unless there is a revolution
once a decade. Law, however, is the one social science that has
advanced solely by evolution and we have much to gain by acquiring
its spirit. And law would gain equally by an alliance with
us; for the socializing of law is the most important and pressing
need of the American people. Legal encrustments of social traditions