weakness against strength is to favor weakness and bid it multiply
and replenish the nation. That is one way of building a weak
natioll. It would obviously be better to protect strength against
weakness. As a matter of fact, that comes more nearly being
the policy of any country worth living in than the opposite.
Criminals are weak rather than strong. Somewhere between thirty
and fifty per cenL of them are feeble minded. It is found economical
to protect strength against that kind of weakness at least.
However, the aim of the niation-builder should be neither to protect
weakness against strength, nor primiiarily to protect strength
against weakness. The obvious thing to do is to protect production
against predation, usefulness against harmfulness, virtue
against vice. Whether the predacious act is performed by a
strong or a weak individual does not matter. It must be repressed
in either case. Whether the productive act be performed by a
weak or a strong individual does not matter; it must be protected
in eitlher case. Only thus can the nation grow strong, prosperous,
and fit to survive in the stern rivalry, economic or military,
among national groups.
One of the widest of these divergences of economic opinion, depending
upon the point of approach, is found in the answers to
the question as to how wealth ought to be distributed. From the
point of view of those who are interested primarily in consumers'
satisfactions, especially in the satisfactions of those consumers
who are now living and possessed of voices with which to clamor
for their share, there is much to be said in favor of some approach
to equality of possessions. The weak producers probably have on
the aNverage as muclh capacity for consumers' enjoyment as the
stronig producers. Certainly no very satisfactory argument to the
contrary has yet been presented. If the maximum of consumors'
satisfaction is the object to be sought, the weight of the argumeiit
is in favor of somne approach to equality. It is demonstrated
that among people with equal capacity for enjoyment equality of
consumption yields the maximum satisfaction. It is true that
some concession would have to be made in favor of the strong
producer provided it were found that he would not put forth his
maximum effort unless he received special rewards. Unless the
strong producers did put forth their best efforts at production,
there would be fewer consumers' goods and consequently less consumers'
satisfactions. It would therefore be necessary to allow
the strong producers just enough in the way of special rewards