 Significance of a Comprehensive System of Education 5 
 adult, which will call forth and train all the forms of talent and 
 ability to be found in the children and adults of a great nation. 
 I mean by the economic significance of such system, the relation 
 which it would bear to the production of national wealth. 
 I need not say that no system of national education, in the sense 
 in which I use it here, has ever existed in the United States. 
 There are thousands, nay one may say hundreds of thousands, 
 of children within the United States and within the territory sub- 
 ject to its jurisdiction who have never been reached by systematic 
 school eduication of any sort. There are thousands more children 
 in the United States and in the territory subject to its juris- 
 diction who have never had the benefit of any schooling beyond a 
 mere attempt to bring to them the opportunity to learn, in a feeble 
 way, the elements of the three R's; and almnost no attempt has 
 been made to reach in any systematic way, for the purpose of 
 developing all the talent within its children, the population of 
 any single state of the American union. Nor has any attempt 
 worth mention up to the present been made to strengthen and 
 supplement such elementary education as is brought within the 
 reach of the young children of the commuinity by a system of 
 encouraging and sustaininig the further prosecution of the educa- 
 tion of the schools, in later youth and earlier or later adult life. 
 All economists have recognized, though I think in a very 
 inadequate way, the importance to the production of national 
 wealth of the intelligence, knowledge, anid skill of the laborer. It 
 would be an observation that could scarcely escape the attention 
 of any student of economy at any period of the world's history 
 that the more intelligent and better trained the laborer may be, 
 the more efficient would he be, other things being equal, as an 
 instrument of production in the general scheme of national econ- 
 omy. But even these economic writers who have given most 
 attention to this aspect and have dwelt upon it most fully, seem 
 to me not to have realized the possibilities for the increase of 
 national wealth which lie in the increased intelligence, education, 
 and skill of the laborer. Very few of them have recognized the 
 extent to which this intelligence, this education, and this skill 
 may be increased by the conscious taking thought and conscious 
 action of the community, directed toward this specific end. Still 
 fewer of them have recognized that an educational system, in this 
 large sense in which I have used it, may above all be an important 
 factor in the development of that directing, managerial, initiating 
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 