equilibrium. The development of the industrial evils of today
and the consequent demand for regulation are simply an unconscious
acknowledgment that, all things considered, we have
reached in this country a stage of relatively diminishing returns
in our economic activity. It is a recognition of the truth of the
law of diminishing returns and of the Malthusian doctrine of
population, that unless the arts progress more rapidly than
population there is bound in time to be a relative pressure of
population on subsistence.

Man is so constituted that when he feels the evils of an existing
system he is likely to adopt measures of reform which will
produce evils as great as those he is seeking to remedy. That
danger exists now. We need to look very closely at the tendency
towards the extension of the authority of government into the
details of our economic life. The principle of competition, the
system of economic liberalism, has been too helpful to the progress
of mankind to be given up altogether. It has become an enduring
part of our civilization and philosophy of life. We cannot
deny that the competitive system has promoted liberty and
welfare, initiative and perseverance, industry and success, wealth
and culture, an abundance that has relieved poverty, has exploited
to human benefit the resources of nature more abundantly
than ever before, has enlarged knowledge, has provided for the
possibility of a greatly increased population, and, generally, has
uplifted the life of the people. No system which will deprive mankind
of these advantages is likely to promote welfare unless it
supplies other motives to the same results. For competition has
been a developing force, even if it has failed somewhat as a controlling
one. The motive power to action is of more iniportance
in the long run than the regulation of action.
In order to judge clearly the reasonableness of this demand for
wider government control of economic life, and possible results
of acquiescence in it, we must recall for a moment the ultimate purpose
of government. It is, undoubtedly, the promotion of the
welfare of the people who organize it. In the words of Justice
Gray, "The prosecution of the safety, health, the morals, good
order and the general welfare is the chief end of government,"
and the general welfare includes protection of opportunity to
make a living. This is not a new maxim in the jurisprudence
of the English-speaking peoples. The system of personal liberty
and the system of government control, or any combination of