agement, as well as a place for pure government ownership, even
though a mixed system or systems, such as I have in mind as possible,
be placed between.
We already have some examples of mixed types, such as government
regulation; leases to private capitalists with reversionary
rights to the city, state, or nation; subsidies; price fixing; guaranteeing
prices; underwriting against loss; taxes on profits or on
excess profits.
The important point is that, under the present private-profit
system, the chance of profits and risk of losses as well as the management
are entirely in the hands of one only of the three classes
interested in the success of the enterprise. The other two classes,
namely, the workers and the public, do not ordinarily participate
much, if at all. The enterpriser or chance-taker has, under this
system, come to think and to speak of his industry as "my business"
and gets quoted even as saying "the public be damned."
For instance, we entrust the great public function of conducting
our public press to irresponsible private capitalists who in turn
are largely controlled by their advertisers, even more irresponsible.
Fundamentally the question is one of adequately representing
the parties whose interests are involved. Only incidentally is it a
question of efficiency. Yet I believe the two are not so far apart
as is often supposed. An efficient autocracy in industry is as
suicidal in the end as an efficient autocracy in politics has shown
itself to be. Either is unstable because unrepresentative. The
most enduring of great banks is the Bank of England because it
is based not on a narrow money-making efficiency, but on the idea
of efficiency for public service. Even its governor represents not
the banker in the English sense but the "merchant," a merchant
banker who stands partly for the public whom the banker serves.
Yet the Bank of England is technically a private bank. Its great
merit is that the bank's customers, including the government, participate
in shaping its policy.
While government enterprise has glaring defects, the present
system of private profit is zalso defective. It is even very costly
to the public in that the enterpriser requires the chance of large
profits to compensate for the large risks he asssumes. Two unfortunate
consequences follow. One is that in this great game of
chance the lottery winnings make multimillionaires out of millionaires,
which is inconsistent with democratic ideals and democratic
progress. The other is that it creates hostility on the part