variations. In order tu apply the former, we must have two
iinstances which tally in every particular except the one which is
the subject of inquiry. In order to apply the latter, we must have
a series of phenomena varying together.2
To prove the inapplicability of the method of differences, Mill
takes the example of a protective tariff and shows that it would
be quite impossible to find two nations which are exactly alike in
every respect excepting only in the presence or absence of such a
tariff.3

The method of concomitant variations he thinks equally impossible,
because every attribute of the social body is influenced by
innumerable causes. Hence the changes are the effects, not of a
single cause, but of the combination of many causes.4
We may concede, the difficulty of applying the method of
differences to test the effect of a protective tariff upon the general
wealth of nations, and yet recognize the possibility of experiments
if applied in a different way. It will be noticed that the question
which Mill asks is extremely vague. He inquires whether or not
a protective tariff is "favorable to national riches." That very
question itself requires a further explanation. What do we mean
by "national riches"? Do we take into account the mass of
wealth, or also its distribution, and if we take account of its mass
only, do we mean the total mass or the wealth per capita? In
order to apply the experimental method to economic questions,
we must apply it as it has been applied successfully to the natural
sciences. Now the greatest achievements in science have been
attained, not by putting such general questions as that instanced
by Mill, but by making the questions more and more specific, taking
into accounit only a limited number of phenomena at a time.
Thus while it may well be impossible to trace the effect of a
protective tariff upon the general wealth of the country, it is not
so difficult to trace its effect on the separate factors entering into
that wealth, such as the distribution of wealth between different
classes, the prices of protected commodities, the conservation of
the natural resources of the country, the growth of monopoly, etc.
In claiming for economic phenomena the value which we attach
to experimentation, it should be understood that we are not dealing