 10 American Economic Association 
 soils. We have not as yet reached an ultimate judgment as to tht 
 conditions of soil fertility, or as to the conditions under which 
 the productivity of soils is maintained or destroyed. We have 
 found out a few things in this respect, but the world of what we do 
 not know is so much larger than the world of what we know that 
 for my part I have never been able to feel that extreme anxiety 
 in regard to the depletion of our soils that many of my colleagues 
 who are engaged in the study of soil chemistry and soil physics 
 and soil biology have thus far felt. There is doubtless such a 
 thing as ruining the soil. There is such a policy as the ruinous 
 exploitation of the natural qualities and resources of the soil; 
 but I have a firm belief that if the nation, or the race, would 
 give its attention and its thought as seriously to the problems 
 of soil fertility as it has to problems connected with the 
 army and navy we should find ways and means of increasing our 
 crops while protecting and restoring the fertility of soils which 
 at present are quite beyond the possibility of even our imagination. 
 In the same way, while we are undoubtedly guilty of great waste 
 in the exploitation of our stores of iron, and such waste ought to 
 be stopped, yet I have full confidence that if we should give 
 thought and attention and money to scientific investigation directed 
 along right lines we should find some substitute for iron fully 
 as efficient and fully as helpful as iron itself, long before it should 
 fail us. And the same thing is true to a greater or less extent of 
 all our national resources. 
 I am aware that this view of human progress is scouted by 
 many as lacking substantial proof of its correctness, as mere 
 nonsense and the stuff that dreams are made of; and it is fortu- 
 nately not necessary for me, in order to make my point, to demon- 
 strate the full truth of the proposition, since all that is requisite 
 for my present purpose is to secure your consent to the proposi- 
 tion that we may materially increase the conditions of national 
 wealth by a properly considered educational policy. 
 That the skill and intelligence of the average laboring man 
 in the United States were greatly increased by the astonishing 
 development of our elementary and secondary school system dur- 
 ing the years following the war must, I think, be conceded by any 
 student of our national history. And yet that education was very 
 largely limited to giving the rudiments of an English education, 
 such as reading, writing, and ciphering-and that not to all by 
 any means. 
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 