other motive,-that is, under compulsion. In fact, the wage system
as based on individual bargaining, under our present interpretation
of individual private contract and private property, is as
inevitably doomed as African slavery was doomed in the United
States in 1860. For if private property is to be preserved as a
necessary inducement to energy, thrift, and economic production,
society must be so organized as to present that appeal to more
than an infinitesimal and ever-decreasing portion of the population.
The possibility of attaining the goal is at present too remote from
the consciousness of the vast majority of mankind to have the
desired effect.
This is not the time or the place to suggest a specific remedy
for this evil. It is probable that a solution will be found only after
a multitude of experiments in many directions, such as cooperation,
profit sharing, education, and the like, many of which in the
nature of the case must prove failures.
Whatever the final outcome may be it must accomplish two
important results: it will give the workman a conscious share in
the direction of the industry; and it will also, in addition to a guaranteed
minimum wage that may as Hobson suggests be regarded not
as wages but as cost, give him a share in the speculative gains or
profits of the industry. So much is required to keep up the efficiency
of production and to keep the workmen from sinking to
the inefficiency of servile labor.
Nor does the tradition that anyone can acquire property under
the present system, or the isolated instances of poor men who have
become rich, negative this conclusion. The fact is that we have
too recently escaped from a condition of abundant free land and
substantial equality of wealth and opportunity resulting from
and accompanying these unappropriated natural resources, to
make any such historical examples pertinent to the present inquiry.
It is pretty well agreed today that in the absence of specific and
conscious social action, working through the state, social classes
tend not only to perpetuate themselves, but, as time goes on, to
become more and more consciously guided by class motives.
In the absence of such social action the United States now
offers the most striking field for maintaining and perpetuating such
classes. First, we have the greatest degree of inequality; next,
we have the highest degree of rapid movement, at the same time
that our large vested interests have already learned to act as a unit