national ideals-and I know that there are still people who main-
tain the moral value of such contests-no matter how high a
value one may set upon the educational discipline which universal
compulsory military service effects in the young men of a nation
which adopts it-and I am aware that there are some very
estimable people who set a high value upon such training-still
I think the overwhelming opinion of the students of economics is
that we have long passed the point at which it is desirable to extend
still further the war budget.
The statement has been made that of late the appropriations
of the federal government are distributed in such a way that nearly
seventy-five per cent may be properly classed as war expenditures,
that is, preparation for war, pensions payable on account of war,
interest on the public debt contracted because of war, etc., etc.
My own estimate runs higher.
Some twenty-five years ago I made a rough estimate of the
expenditures of the federal government up to that time from the
year 1789, covering nearly the first century of our national
existence. I found that the total expenditure for all purposes
on the part of the federal government had been something like
eighteen billions of dollars, and of that amount sixteen and one-
half billions had been spent for war, using the term again in
its large sense, of money spent in preparation for war, in the
conduct of war, and in settling the bills after the war was over.
In other words, the expenditure of the federal government up
to that time had been sixteen and one-half units for war and one
and one-half for all other purposes whatsoever, including the
so-called enormous expenditures for river and harbor improve-
ment. Eleven twelfths of the income of the federal government
spent on war!
And this is a peaceful nation!
Nobody can deny that a country which wishes to develop. its
civilization in an efficient way must protect itself from armed
aggression and must maintain domestic order. Everyone will,
furthermore, grant that if we propose, for example, to fortify
our Atlantic and Pacific coasts in such a way that no fleet in the
world could make a landing, it will take very much larger sums of
money than we have thus far spent or have thought of spending
upon war and war's alarms. But it is a long call from admitting
that if we are intending to fortify our coasts in the manner
suggested we must spend far more money than we are spending,