by the objectionable recall of judges or of constitutional decisions,
or both. The doctrine that in a democracy the courts can maintain
property interests unchanged for any considerable time, and
more particularly the property interests of large concentrated
wealth, against a well settled and determined public opinion, without
grave dangers meantime, seems highly doubtful.
Be that as it may, it will always remain true that the right to
determine public policy is a political right-in fact the most important
and fundamental political right-over which the public is
unwilling to surrender control.

The question then is, whether or not we are to keep our courts
in politics, and make them a football of partisan activity, or
whether we are to recognize once for all that the determining of
public policy is a political function, and that the legislature is a
more trustworthy political organ than the courts for such a
function.

There is no higher or more important public function than the
impartial administration of justice between man and man, and the
enforcement of the law. That the courts ought to be removed
from political influences all right-minded men admit. That this
can be easily accomplished the English experience proves. It is a
very significant fact that in the recent reconstitution of the Eng7
lish House of Lords by which it was effectually shorn of its political
powers, no suggestion even was made to deprive that House of its
judicial powers, for the simple reason that none but the judges
took part in the legal decisions, and the judges confine themselves
to declaring and enforcing the law and do not try to make the law.
But the judges can never be removed from political attack and
party influence in this or any other country so long as the chief
political function-the determining of public policy-is performed
by the courts.

The present system does not, in fact, adjust the public policy
satisfactorily to the actual needs of the day. It tends, rather, to
preserve the form adapted to a strictly pioneer organization of
society based on economic equality and free land, while we are
actually living in a marvelously complex civilization, with great
inequality and with our natural resources already appropriated.
Should the present decline in real wages continue for many years,
the tension is likely to become very great, for inequality, with the
consequent lack of bargaining ability, tends to increase at an everaccelerating
rate.
