living on the wage they get may be regarded as evidence that
to them it is a living wage, although not a desirable living wage.
The question to be considered is not whether such an industry is
worth while, but whether, if we by election abolish it, those who
are thrown out of work can find other employment at as good
or better wages. It is difficult to see where they would find it if,
ins economic terminology, they are "the marginal workers," and
are already getting what they produce.
The imposition of a minimum wage under such circumstances
would make it necessary for employers in many cases to raise the
margin of industry and discharge their present marginal workers.
Otherwise the business would not be profitable. This is only another
way of saying what has already been said, that insistence
upon the minimum wage would doubtless reduce to idleness all
below the new margin, unless, indeed, as might happen in some
cases, the improvement in the standard of living of the lowest
workers increased their efficiency, or unless the imposition of
the additional burden on industry stimulated the discovery of
ncw methods or resources. In the one case we should have an
increase of productivity of labor; in the other, of capital. In
either case the industry could pay the wage imposed. But we
could not hope that such a result would be general.
Looking at the matter from another angle, a minimum wage
which was not earned at the margin would reduce profit or interest,
or both, and react on the accumulation and investment of
capital. In time there would be inevitably a slackening of industry
and a reduction of employment. I see no logical escape
from the conclusion that a general minimum wage, or a minimum
wage imposed widely, if it were higher than the product of the
marginal worker, would act to curtail industry, check accumulation
and investment and induce unemployment.
Moreover, we must remember that if the state insists upon a
minimum wage and guarantees it, it also should guarantee efficiency.
There is no more justice in compelling the employer or
investor to abandon his profit or interest, if it is only legitimate
in amount, in order to raise wages than there is in permitting
unduly low wages to be paid in order to increase profit.
Any effort of the government to regulate prices, except to
see that they are not monopolistic or are not fixed by agreement
among other agents, is open to criticism for reasons somewhat
similar to those given against the minimum wage proposition.