is at a disadvantage as compared with many of the natural
sciences, in that it does not admit of laboratory experiments.
There are two considerations which support this assumption.
In the first place economics deals with human beings in their
social relations. It does not even deal with them as individuals.
It must therefore consider large groups, often whole states or
groups of states. The economist has neither the power to force,
nor the wealth to pay for, experiments upon nations, and if he
had, he would in many cases be deterred by moral scruples from
attempting them. Such a power might conceivably be exercised
by some oriental despot, and such persons have existed. Herod,
the son of Antipater, for example, if he had been as much interested
in sociology as he was in politics, would have made a good experi-
menter, since he was not only able but quite willing to put to death
all of the children born within a certain time in Bethlehem.
Tughlak, the son of Muhammed, who ruled Northern India from
1324 to 1351, is in the same class. He has been described as
"learned, merciless, religious and mad." He was thus equipped
morally and mentally as well as politically for trying social experi-
ments on a large scale. And he did so. For we are told that he
"tried to replenish his treasury by the simple expedient of coining
brass in vast quantities and ordaining that it should be accepted
as silver."' He thus decreed that the King's brass should be
equal to the people's silver, and doubtless introduced among his
people the familiar phenomena of an inflated currency.
But Herod and Tughlak represent past types. The modern
economist, even if he were at the same time a great statesman,
could not deliberately experiment on a nation without running the
risk of being committed either to an insane asylum or a jail. And
yet the really important thing for the economist is that experi-
ments be tried, not that he try them himself, and in view of the
great cost of social laboratory work the economist is really for-
tunate in having experiments tried for him without expense to