If constitutional arrangements are such as to enable a frequent
and easy adjustment at any time, it is probable that the mass of
its rights, and consequently the value involved, will in any one
instance be so small that a community will be willing for the sake
of the added security and the encouragement to labor and investment
to expropriate those rights and pay full compensation. But
where property is concentrated in a few hands, or where property
has been protected by constitutional provisions to such a degree
as to make a change of law difficult, if not impossible, and where
that property has been enabled, by what is popularly considered
unjust if not illegal means, to prevent the necessary constitutional
and legal changes for a long enough time to allow the mass of
property condemned by the moral sentiment to become enormous,
is it likely that the public will consent to tax itself to pay compensation
on the necessary scale?

Nor can one psychological consideration be safely overlooked,
namely, that the longer such a condition prevails the more the
owners of such property become convinced not only that they are
right, and legally and morally entitled to such property, but, still
more important, they come to believe that they can in fact maintain
their possession by the old means indefinitely. Therefore the
proposition for expropriation with compensation falls on deaf
ears, and is regarded as an invasion of their most sacred rights by
those who consider themselves strong enough to maintain such
rights. Under such circumstances abolition with full compensation
is fought almost if not quite as bitterly as direct confiscation.
Does anyone believe that the owners of nomination boroughs in
England in 1832 would have been willing to give up their property
rights in such boroughs, involving their whole political existence,
for a money consideration? And yet Lord Eldon said they were
as much property rights, "as your lordships' peerages and titles."
Or, would the American slave holders, after 1850, have listened
to a proposition to free their slaves for any amount of money?
Or, does anyone believe that the liquor interests in America today
would consent for a money compensation to have all their property
expropriated, and their owners thus deprived of their present
control over political life, vice, and crime? Or, has Mr. Rockefeller'
s utterances led us to believe that he and the other coal
owners of Colorado would give up their rights "to protect their
employees in their rights of individual bargaining against the labor
unions" for any monetary award no matter how large? Are not