and democracy as against the selfish interests of either the
capitalist or the laborer as such.

If we jealously guard our independence and impartiality we
snall gain for our profession the enviable position of being the
logical arbiters of the class struggle now beginning-arbiters
which both sides can trust. We may, and should, take sides, but
only as a just judge takes sides when he renders his decision and
only after a fair weighing of the evidence.
WATe may be sure that there will be a bitter struggle over the
distribution of wealth until a more or less definite readjustment
has been found. Professor King of the University of Wisconsin
has shown that something like two-thirds of our people have no
capital except the clothes on their backs and a little furniture and
personal belongings, while the major part of our capital is owned
by less than two per cent of the population. The income-distribution
is not quite so unequal. About lhalf of our national income
is received by one-fourth of our population. There is evidence to
show that this striking inequality of distribution of capital and
income is increasing and that it is greater in cities than in the
country. Still more distressing is the fact that, since the twentietli
century began, wages reckoned in commodities, not money,
have been actually decreasing while profits have been increasing.
The purchasing power of wages over food in 1917 was only a little
over two-thirds of what it was ten years before. The extraordinarily
high wages of 1918 among certain forms of skilled labor
are, of course, not representative.

The real scientific study of the distribution of wealth has, we
must confess, scarcely begun as yet. The conventional academic
study of the so-called theory of distribution into rent, interest,
wages, and profits is only remotely related to the subject. This
subject, the causes and cures for the actual distribution of capital
and income among real persons, is one of the many now in need
of our best efforts as scientific students of society. I shall here
merely throw into the discussion a few tentative thoughts which
seem to me to be now either completely overlooked or only dimly
appreciated.

There are, I believe, two master keys to the distribution of
wealth: the Inheritance system and the Profit system.
The practices which happen to be followed by men of great
wealth in making wills is certainly the chief determinant of the
distribution of their wealtlh after their deatlh. Mr. Albert G.