to see it grow and hold an honorable place among the nations of
the earth, these are the salvation of those voiceless generations
whose prosperity and happiness for centuries to come depend upon
what we do here and now.

It must be admitted, however, that there are perversions of the
national sentiment as there are perversions of hunger, thirst, and
sex. But it ought not to be difficult to distinguish between the
perversion of an instinct and the instinct itself. "Does not war
proceed from national sentiment?" is sometimes asked by the men
and women who have forgotten, if they ever knew, that wars were
more frequent and more continuous before such a thing as nationality
or national sentiment existed than they are now. It is probably
true, however, that when it does come, a war between highly
organized and powerful nations is more terrific than one between
weak and disorganized hordes with little national consciousness.
If a powerful national sentiment is a factor in building a powerful
and prosperous nation, and saich a nation is therefore capable of
carrying on a terrific war, there may then be said to be a connection
between a strong national sentiment and the terrific character
of a modern war. But shall we surrender the power and prosperity
which come from a compact and well organized national
life, and grow weak and unprosperous, merely in order that we
may not be able to wage war on such a scale and with such destructiveness
as that which the world is now witnessing? Before
a war can be carried on on a vast scale there must be vast power
and resources, both in men and the products of the mind. Before
it can be very destructive there must be something to destroy as
well as something to be used in destruction. To propose to divest
humanity of all national sentiment in order to save it from the
havoc of war is about as reasonable as to divest it of appetite in
order to save it from the perversions of appetite.
"Where there is no vision, the people perish." This is said to
be a bad translation. "Where there is no vision the people become
disorganized, or throw off restraint," is said to be more accurate,
but it may mean much the same thing. If they become
disorganized, if they throw off restraint, if they will not subject
themselves to discipline, they will grow weak. In the eternal process
of trial and rejection, of survival and extinction, by which
every step in progress thus far in this unfinished world has come
about, weakness means death. This applies not to plant and
animal forms alone, but to social institutions, moral systems,