that the action of government be confined to supervision of business
as it is carried on in order to prevent infractions of the law
and give full publicity to the methods of so-called "big business"
; and finally, that the right of society in great accumulations
of property shall be mnore clearly defined and enforced either
by taxation or other means.

The proposal for what is called welfare legislation, for such
purposes as the prevention of accidents, sanitary conditions of
work, due limitation of hours of work, the protection of women
and children in industry, and all similar legislation, has long
passed out of the stage of debate. Formerly governments busied
themselves in enacting labor laws against labor. Now they busy
themselves in the enactmenit of laws interfering with labor in the
interest of labor. The principle of this legislation is accepted,
however men may differ about details.

When we come to the proposition to fix a minimum wage, we
are confronted with more debatable questions. In so far as the
wages actually paid in so-called sweated and parasitic industries
are below what the employer could afford to pay while still
making a proper profit-in so far, in other words, as they are
due to exploitation-; in so far as wages paid are insufficient to
afford a decent living in any industry in which profits are large
from some monopolistic advantage ;-in short, in all cases in
which wages are below what is necessary for a decent living in
any employment because of "exploitation"-there can be but
one opinion of the desirability of insisting upon a minimum. It
would be a mistake, however, either to insist upon a minimum
wage in all industries, or to compel the payment of a minimum
wage which, as a matter of fact, is more than the value produced
by the person receiving it if the returns to entrepreneur and
capitalist are but fair, or to insist upon a minimum wage in any
case without providing for its constant readjustment. To justify
these statements we must consider some of the effects of such an
action. In the discussion I repeat that I am leaving out all cases
of mere exploitation, assuming that in these a compulsory standard
is economically justifiable.

If a minimum wage is established larger in amount than the
product of the marginal workers, they are bound to be thrown
out of work. It is easy to say that if an industry is not able
to pay a "living wage" it had better not exist. But a "living
wage" is a very variable thing, and the fact that some people are