essay into a huge book or for a popular writer to collect his essays
and articles into a similar volume in the hope of passing them off
as a scientific product. Both evils confuse and annoy and can
be removed only by concerted action following a clearer recognition
of the function of economic literature in modern life.
A publisher to whom I offered a book said that it would give
me a reputation but there would be no sales. I have pondered
on that remark many times. Is the reputation that comes from
a book having no sale a real reputation? And is not-and this
question I ask in all seriousness and with much hesitation-is not
a reputation that you or I acquire through books published by
our universities or the periodicals they support a fake reputation
-that it is not honorable for us to have? If there was no real
world and no large audience seeking increased light on current
problems we might be justified in accepting such support and pride
ourselves in the luster it gives. But when real tests of success
are at hand false ideals prevent the application of tests that
would sift the chaff from the wheat. For Jones to write for
Smith and Smith for Jones-or for both of them to write large
books to enable them to pose before college presidents, Boards
of Trustees and admiring groups of friends makes a farce of
economics and prevents its advance. So long as we are useless
pampered creations of false university ideals our books and
pamphlets are of no more consequence than we are when wearing
caps and gowns in a university parade. A bit of color, an impressive
picture perhaps for parents and friends to look at when
they come to see their sons graduate, but something soon to be
forgotten except as a part of a pleasing memory.
In reality our books are of less consequence than caps and
gowns, and I doubt not that universities would profit if they used
the money now spent in printing useless books and journals in
giving more color and grace to public anniversaries. So few of
the public go to libraries or read reviews of pompous volumes,
that self-advertisement in these ways must bring a meager return.
And why shall false investment of time and energy be demanded
when a real public is at hand craving for information and inspiration.
Surely economists have little reason to accept false standards
when real tests are so plainly visible. Teln articles written
for special journals should not give the reputation that comes