destroy political liberty or economic opportunity. "The best
size of unit for general welfare is the thing for us to establish,
not necessarily the one which has the largest output or the
lowest unit cost."
Moreover, there is justification for fixing a maximum financial
unit of business, aside from the question of greatest operating
efficiency. For even if competition, working as it does with considerable
friction, fixes a price that is a fair return of capital
invested, this is not enough for the protection of the public if
the capital invested becomes larger than is adequate to performii
the total service needed. If it goes beyond this, a "fair" return
necessitates a price larger than the value of the product to the
community, and economic friction, to say nothing of monopolistic
control, sometimes makes it possible to secure such a price.
The fifth proposal in the program of government extension
policy is the imposition of greater burdens upon accumulated
wealth. This means a renewed emphasis on the social origin and
character of property and therefore on the right of limiting it,
not only to prevent unjust accumulation, but any accumulation
which in character or amount threatens the welfare of society.
This question is before the country now in the suit against the
Harvester Trust. According to the prosecution in this case, the
organization and power of the trust are such that "if the International
Harvester Company were disposed to exercise the power
its enormous wealth gives, and if it were left unrestrained to do
so, it could drive every competitor it has from the field." It is
necessary to notice that there is no new legal, ethical, or social
principle involved in this doctrine, although the wisdom of extending
the principle at present may be an open question.
Some general consequences of these proposals must not pass unnoticed.
Undoubtedly, a certain amount of good can be done
by proper supervision to prevent the oppression of the weak by
the strong and the impairment of the public welfare. It may
be true that, as one writer puts the matter, the present movement
is an attempt by the community to resume sovereign power in
order to conserve the right of the individual to make his living.
But bureaucratic supervision can never be a permanent substitute
for proper standards of righteousness among men in their dealings
with one another. We may have an honest and efficient
officialdom that puts the common weal above corporate and personal
interest, but we cannot have it for very long. The inherent