 12 Am4zerican Economic Association 
 Illinois, but those of the mountain regions of the South and those 
 of the semideserted portions of the older states, shall without ex- 
 ception have access to these opportunities. 
 But a national system of education will include, furthermore, 
 foi every child, an opportunity for technical, special training, 
 looking forward to the career which the child is expecting to take 
 iup or which his parents are planning for him. This means in a 
 large sense-and why should we hesitate today to speak it out 
 bol(dly-a system of trade schools, a system of occupation schools 
 so universal, so comprehensive, varying, of course, in character 
 witlh the conditions in the different localities, that every child 
 shall have the chance to prepare himself more efficiently for his 
 life work in a trade or other occupation. 
 It is national waste of the first magnitude to turn children into 
 the avenues of trades and commerce and industry in this great 
 niation today without some of that kind of training for such work, 
 which the school best of all can give. The apprentice system, 
 as you all know, in the old form, if it ever was the ideal thing 
 which it was supposed to be-and for my part I can find no 
 evidence that it was-has at any rate today gone to pieces. The 
 children of the communiity do not have a fair opportunitv to 
 prepare themselves on the technical side for efficient work. A 
 portion of this preparation, moreover, can be best given for nearly 
 every occupation in the school, and that portion should be the 
 heritage of every child. 
 But hundreds of thousands of children must, as a matter of 
 fact, under our present economic conditions, go directly and 
 imnmnediately from the compulsory school period into the process of 
 earning a living. And the demands of industry are such as to take 
 practicallv all the time and strength of these young people from 
 the very moment of assuming this new burden. 
 It lies in the interest of the community, looking upon these 
 children as mere instruments of production, regarding them as 
 mere means of increasing the national wealth, to see that condi- 
 tions are such as to make them ever more efficient elements in our 
 scheme of national production. This means that the school system 
 must provide some systematic, continuation school opportunities; 
 and if necessary that the laws regulating the labor of youth shall 
 be so changed as to provide an opportunity for all young people, 
 from the completion of the compulsory school age and for at least 
 two or three years after, a chance to get that benfit which comes 
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 