The present system is based fundamentally on competition, pri-
vate property, and individual freedom of contract. The univer-
sality and beneficence of competition are assumed. It is also
assumed that when an individual pursues his own financial advan-
tage successfully he creates wealth, and that, under competition,
this wealth will be widely if not equally diffused and the com-
munity will thereby benefit. This teaching remained virtually
unshaken in theory and universal in practice, so far as the organi-
zation of society was concerned, to something like a generation
ago.
Meantime, the surplus wealth, due to the industrial revolution
and the universal application of machinery, had enormously in-
creased and these economic doctrines had become thoroughly
crystalized into a body of positive law and institutions. Nowhere
else was the system so thoroughly entrenched in law as in the
United States under the constitutions, federal and state. Granted
the underlying assumptions of this school and it logically followed
that any conscious attempt to control the production, distribution,
or consumption of wealth was not only an unwise and unjust inter-
ference with natural forces, but was sure to work injury in
practice by making worse the very evils it was aimed to lessen or
abolish.
This deprived society of a conscious aim and left the state like
a ship without a rudder. With the enormous increase of surplus
under such a system, it became increasingly advantageous to in-
dividuals to control this surplus. The economic doctrines, the
principles of laissez-faire, together with the rapid development of
means of communication and transportation, quickened all move-
ment. Combination followed. Nor should it be forgotten that
until very recently the endless extent of free land and unappro-
priated natural resources concealed the true condition of affairs
and the general tendencies of our civilization. At the same time,
the conditions of life were so easy for all that any attempt to
change the constitution of society or to reform the system fell on
deaf ears. The forces making for combination resulted in an un-
mistakable trend toward monopoly and the passing into the control
of a few hands of the natural resources, the instruments of pro-
duction, and, above all, the sources of credit.
It became harder each year for any man to become an inde-
pendent undertaker of industry, or even to entertain a rational
hope of such achievement. This caused class cleavage and social