lands to the states for elementary education. It went farther.
It gave to each of the states certain lands for the development of
hiigher education, the so-called college and seminary funds.
Finally, after long discussion and long agitation stretching
over more than thirty years, the federal government in the year
1862 granted to each state in the Union thirty thousand acres of
land for each senator and representative in the federal congress
for the purpose of establishing in each state a college for the
promotion of agriculture and the mechanic arts. This was
a grant not merely of public lands to the states within which the
public lands were located, but it was a grant to each state in the
Union permitting it to locate its lands where it best could under
the provisions of the law.

A generation passed away and the federal government appropriated
in cash to each state in the Union, March 2, 1887, the
sum of fifteen thousand dollars for the development of an agricultural
experiment station, this money to be paid out of the
proceeds of the sale of public lands. Only three years later,
August 30, 1890, the federal government returned to the same
proposition and then for the first time, with the utmost directness,
it appropriated money from the federal treasury for the support
of these colleges, out of funds not otherwise appropriated. And
thus, in form as well as in reality, the federal government has
committed itself to the proposition of supporting higher education
along practical lines, out of the federal treasury, within the
limits and under the auspices of the states.
This has turned out to be one of the greatest endowments
of higher education ever made by any government. And it has
turned out, I believe, to be one of the most beneficent series of
grants made by any country in the support of higher education.
And it has demonstrated several things. First, that a comparatively
small grant from the federal government for a given educational
purpose, so far from laming local effort or local initiative,
will greatly stimulate the efforts of localities and of states to
develop still further the education which is thus endowed.
According to the last report of the United States Bureau of
Education, sixty-nine institutions were receiving the benefits of this
congressional appropriation. The total appropriation made by
the federal government, exclusive of that for the agricultural
experiment stations, was somewhat less than two million dollars
per year. The total expenditure of these institutions was over