at the end of the Civil War. The ninety and nine would be
tempted to classify him as a white-livered scoundrel. While the
idea might be correct, the nomenclature would not be strictly
scientific. It would be better to call him the kind of philosopher
to whom nationality is a pet abomination.
There is, however, one small class who alone would lose heavily
by a foreign conquest. This class is made up of sundry gentlemen
in Washington and various other capitals now holding jobs and
receiving salaries which, though not large, are as a rule larger
than those same gentlemen could earn elsewhere. They would
most certainly be turned adrift and their places filled by representatives
of the conquering power. If nobody cared except they
who had something to lose in the way of income, these gentlemen
would naturally be most vitally interested. They who think and
talk only in terms of full dinner-pails and easy hours would doubtless
say that these gentlemen were merely afraid of losing their
jobs.

But should the rest of us care? We should. We do not look
cynically upon those gentlemen merely as the holders of easy jobs
and the receivers of fat salaries, though their jobs and their incomes
do undoubtedly mean as much to them as ours do to us.
We look upon them rather as trustees of our national interests
and the agents for the carrying out of our national aspirations.
The sentiment of nationality is as real as hunger, thirst, or
family affection, and like them it supplies us with a motive which
impels us to a proper functioning. Indeed, there is a pretty close
parallelism between family sentiment and national sentiment as a
motive for functioning. To one who possesses neither it would
appear rather stupid to deprive one's self of consumers' satisfactions
merely to provide means for the support of a family. A
man whose interests do not extend beyond a full belly and a short
working day would see no reason why he should sacrifice these
interests merely in order that his species might survive. The
number of men who desert their families and the larger number
who have no families at all, are proof that there are considerable
numbers who reason that way. There may be some moral philosophers
among them to whom family sentiment is a pet abomination.
Why should not a sentimentalist of the same shallow type as the
one referred to above advise all such men not to sacrifice anything
for such an absurd sentiment as family affection, telling them that
they have "nothing to lose but their chains."