policy than that existing before the war were not mutually advantageous,
even if such a trade involved an econiomic sacrifice to
us as a nation, it would none the less truly be required of us today
in order to continue and establish on a permanent foundation that
chivalry which has characterized America's part in the war. The
call of the hour is to be just and generous. The concept of international
obligation has been born. Henceforth any international
arrangements must find their justification in international fairness,
not in unfair national advantage. Whatever "place in the
sun" we seek for ourselves, we must accord to every other nation,
small and great, weak and strong, new and old. The golden rule
must be the rule between nations as well as within a nation.
The proposed League of Nations is part and parcel of this
great idea of international justice now having its new birth and
baptism. Such a league is not only a political necessity as a preventive
of war; it is also an economic necessity as a preventive of
the economic burdens of militarism.
Like our own league of forty-eight states, it would obviate the
necessity of great armaments. Without such a league we must
resume competitive armaments-must, for instance, as our naval
men tell us, compete with England in naval strength; and further
competition in armies and navies would mean economic ruin to
Europe and great impoverishment to the United States. There
are two important special reasons why this would be true. One
is that the world, especially Europe, is so nearly exhausted economically
that even the old military burdens would now be far
harder to bear than before the war. The other is that the renewed
competition would be far more costly than the old, since
we would start off with all the huge equipment which the war
itself has brought.
Secondly, we must be on our guard against the bias of special
interests. This bias enters largely into much thinking on the subject
of the League to Enforce Peace, for there are interests which
would thwart this new and great idea, fearing that the new regime
may upset the old to which they and their private purses had become
well adjusted.
The great question, then, is: Are we, in our internal economics,
to serve the nation as a whole or are we to serve a special group
within the nation?
There can be no objection to an individual economist associating
himself with a special business and putting his talents at its