use productively, to manage, or to invest," should be the slogan
rather than "to each according to his needs."
If I have succeeded in making it clear that it makes a difference
with our conclusions on many questions of economic theory
and policy whether we start from the national or from the particularist
point of view, my next purpose is to plead for the
national point of view. This point of view is especially needed at
the present time because so many weighty opinions are being expressed
against it. Tolstoi pronounced patriotism to be a vice.
One of the leading moralists of the country has said that nationalism
is one of his pet abominations, having in mind the situation in
Europe at the present time. It is doubtless wrong for a people
to make war under the stimulus of national arrogance; but his
philosophy would make it equally wrong for a nation to fight to
defend its territory or even its existence against the attacks of
national arrogance. It may be said, in behalf of his consistency,
that the moralist just quoted accepts the latter proposition along
with the former. National existence is not worth fighting for under
his theory. From that point of view, Horace Greely's advice
regarding the secession movement was profoundly wise, "Let the
erring sisters depart in peace." There were many in those days
to whom national unity did not seem worth fighting for, and who
opposed the war on that ground. From the particularist point of
view it would be a little difficult to state what class in the North
had a definite economnic interest in the question, or how the nonslave
owning majority in the South had anything at stake.
Neither the laboring classes nor the business and professional
classes were in visible danger of having their incomes reduced.
All classes then living could, so far as any one has ever been able
to show, have consumed as much had the country split up as if it
remained united. The only class that might have suffered economically
was the government officials. They would have ruled
over a smaller country, and the salaries might conceivably have
been smaller, though even this is by no means certain. To be sure,
there were certain large but vague questions regarding the distant
future which may have weighed heavily on the minds of men.
Had the country split then, it was difficult to see where the particularist
tendency would end. The possibility that at some distant
day their descendants would suffer from the weakness of a
divided country may have had its influence; but such considerations
do not have much weight except with those who have what