to the proposition that there is any necessity for expending such
sums of money, or for undertaking to fortify our coast at all.
For my part I do not see how anyone who studies American
industry and our international position can help feeling that we
are already spending a larger proportion of our national income
upon preparation for war than is justified by any dangers which
actually threaten us.

Now I believe that if the students of economics would, acting
together, that is, if this Association would persistently, in season
and out of season, call attention to the danger of spending upon
war an undue proportion or our national income, we should be
able to affect very materially, in the course of years, the policy
of the government on this point. This may serve as a mere
illustration of the proposition that fundamental to any large
consideration of practical economic problems and of the actual
conduct of a national economy must be this question of how we
propose to distribute our expenditure, for what purposes we
intend to spend the national wealth which we have once created.
And as I believe that we have thus far spent entirely too much
money in war and for war purposes, so I believe that we have
spent far too little money for education. And it is this problem
which I wish to present to your attention tonight.
The manner of the consumption of wealth has a great and
fundanmental effect upon the production of wealth and upon the
possible increase in the production of wealth. That is, some forms
of consumption are distinctive hindrances to the increase of
wealth and no theory of production, no system of practical politics
can be in any sense complete or satisfactory which does not bear
this fact in mind.

So this evening I desire to discuss somewhat fully, from the
standpoint of practical politics, the effect of a broad scheme of
national education upon the increase of national wealth and what
policy we ought to adopt in regard to it.
The subject of my remarks this evening is, the Economic
Significance of a Comprehensive System of National Education.
I mean by system of national education in this title, a system
of education so extensive in its scope as to reach every child,
and for that matter every adult too, within the bounds of the
United States or in the territory subject to its jurisdiction.
I mean by a comprehensive system of national education, a
system which will excite and develop all sides of the child and