industries have introduced a "Senate" to represent the office staff
and a "House of Representatives" to represent the shop workers.
These, with the executive, exercising a veto power, manage the industry
after the pattern of our political republic. This and
other plans for a more representative control are worth careful
study. A large part of our present dissatisfaction with industry
comes from its autocratic control, which is growing more rapidly
centralized even than is the actual ownership. The device of the
corporation, especially the holding corporation, has put a large
fraction of the capital of the country into the hands of a small
group, of magnates mostly in New York City.
So much for the distribution and control of wealth. There are
other subjects equally worthy of our attention. Even if the,distribution
of wealth could be ideal, the industrial world would find
abundant reason for discontent. Just as the political freedom
sought by the French Revolution proved insufficient and disappointing,
so will what is now called economic freedom be found
insufficient and disappointing.

When we speak, however figuratively, of wage-slavery, we ought
to think not only of low wages, but also of the repulsiveness of
the work itself. The great reason why an industry fascinates the
employer but bores the employee is, in my opinion, that human
psychologic laws are neglected.

I hope that psychologists may some day, in cooperation with
economists, help to a truer understanding of the nature of human
freedom. What we liberty lovers are really groping for is, apparently,
not to do as we think we please but to do what will
actually please us after it is done; that is, to satisfy fairly well
all of the great fundamental human instincts, of which there are
many besides the instinct of self-preservation or of making a living.
The workman not only longs for more pay, but he hungers
and thirsts for other things which he cannot formulate, because
so largely unconscious.

The problem of making manual workers contented, or as contented
as the rest of us, or as contented as they can be, is not,
therefore, a problem simply of the distribution of wealth. It is
one of introducing, or re-introducing, certain fundamental motives
into industry. Just as the large capitalist does not usually
accumulate for his children but for the love of accumulating, and
just as inventors (as Professor Taussig has shown) do not usually
invent merely, or even chiefly, for money but for the love of