-with respect to business--that is, other kinds of business. For
much the same reason, they whose business consists in doing rather
than in talking are too frequently impatient of loose talk and disposed
toward its control. It would be a profitable exercise for all
of us to ponder a little more upon the ancient remark about those
who were more anxious to pluck motes from their brothers' eyes
than beams from their own. That would do us more good than
to spend our time inventing absurd reasons why the government
should regulate other people's business and pursue a laissez-faire
policy with respect to our own.

There can scarcely be any doubt that bad talk may do quite as
much harm to the nation as bad business. As many and as direful
calamities have come upon the world through bad talk, false
teaching, pernicious opinions, as through bad business methods.
He who teaches falsehood probably harms the people more than
he who steals a million dollars, though it will appear otherwise to
those who think that truth is unimportant and money all important.
The only question is, Can we trust government officials with
the delicate task of deciding what is good and what is bad talk,
and of suppressing the bad? Well, any government official who
thinks that he is wise enough to regulate industry is not likely to
be withheld by his own modesty from undertaking the regulation
of speech. Again, as a matter of observed fact, no government
official does hesitate to exercise censorship so far as his authority
extends. Over the members of his own staff, which is as far as
his power extends, he does exercise control of speech. Even the
least free and most narrowly sectarian college in this country allows
more freedom to its staff than the most liberal department of
this freest of all governments. The head of a department who
is at all ingenuous will frankly acknowledge this, and justify it
by the perfectly sound reason that any department which is
charged with important regulatory powers must control the utterances
of its staff. I mention these things neither to justify nor
to condemn, but merely to show that one kind of regulation is
very likely to lead to another.

Again, as a matter of observed fact, whenever any nation
"comes up against the real thing," when circumstances compel it
to think in terms of its own existence as a nation, it finds it necessary,
through its government, to control both speech and industry-
the one quite as rigorously as the other. Again, if you
will name the country which in time of peace most thoroughly