results should be provided for in the law itself. How much futile
discussion and how many errors would be avoided if we were able
from year to year to put our hands on the results of the operation
of laws bearing upon economic relations! Just as modern hospitals
not only provide physicians and nurses but also laboratories
and records, so every legislature should have its economic annex,
in which not merely the text of laws but also their results may be
made available both for the legislature and for the student.
The conception of history as an economic laboratory is quite
different from the common conception of economic history. History
is in the main descriptive. It seeks to give us a picture
of the past. If it goes beyond that, it seldom attempts more thail
to trace general causes or to lay down a philosophy of history or
a theory of historical evolution. The economic utilization of
history is almost the antithesis of the economic interpretation of
history, since one is seeking a law of history and the other laws
of economics. The economist undoubtedly owes a debt of gratitude
to historians, and particularly to economic historians, for the
material which they have put at his disposal, and the brilliant
address on "Social Forces in American History," delivered in
1910 by the President of the American Historical Association, is
an indication of the increasing interest which historians are taking
in social and economic elements. The contrast, however, between
their point of view and the economic point of view cannot
be better illustrated than by quoting from this address. Professor
Turner says that he has undertaken his survey for two purposes:
"First, because it has seemed fitting to emphasize the significance
of American development since the passing of the frontier and,
second, because in the observation of present conditions we may
find assistance in our study of the past."' 4 The economist, while
fully appreciating the value and the necessity of studying history
from this point of view, must yet go a step farther and must use
the records of the past as a means of disclosing the operation of
economic forces.
The difference between description and science may be illustrated
by an example taken from the history of physics. The
lamp hanging in the cathedral of Pisa might be described in
every artistic detail by a traveler. The history of the designer