races varies in different parts of the country, it cannot be said
that any one race except the Anglo-Saxon exerts in any section
a purely racial predominance upon our institutions.8 Even in the
South in communities in which the blacks outnumber the whites
twenty-seven to one, the institutions are essentially Anglo-Saxon
and not Africani. While, therefore, we have not the absolute
control over our conditions that is enjoyed by the chemist, and
while the elements are vastly more complicated than those entering
into the ordinary laboratory experiment, we have conditions relati'
vely favorable for obtaining good results.
The temptation is strong to enumerate at least in part some of
the many fields of economic experimentation which are to be
found in the history of the United States, but to do so would
expand an address into a monograph and is, therefore, out of the
question. Some of these departments of study, such as those
relating to currency, to prices, to the rate of interest, have already
yielded valuable results to the investigator. Some of the more
practical questions, such as those relating to land tenure and the
methods of agriculture, as well as the purely governmental questions
involved in taxation and the management of public debt,
still remain to be studied intensively, in spite of a considerable
amount of work already put upon them. Less, on the whole,
has been done with the problems relating to labor, methods of
remuneration, the rates of wages, the efficiency of labor, etc. We
have tried many experiments in this department of economics.
We have had free labor, indentured labor, and complete slavery.
We have made a sudden transition from slavery to freedom, so
sudden as to bring with it many undesirable results, but perhaps
for that reason the more interesting as an economic experiment.
In the application of free labor we have likewise had experiences
of great value. We have had labor both organized and unorganized,
native born and foreign, and we have had trade unions of
many types and representing many stages of development.
Though considerable attention has been given to this topic, many
of its complicated problems have been barely touched upon. The
economist often inquires about the effect of labor on production,