and the story of how it came to be placed there might be told in
full, without adding in the least to our knowledge of physics. It
took the mind of a Galileo, at once analytical and constructive,
to recognize in the apparently meaningless oscillations of the lamp
a constantly acting force, and thus to discover the law of the
pendulum. So the economist must recognize beneath the events
of history the constantly acting economic impulses in the mind
of man.
This view of economic history as a series of experiments is not
in conflict with the evolutionary conception of history. Indeed
it is really necessary to explain it rationally, for, unless we are
willing to accept a blind fatalism, according to which history moves
on without being controlled by human volition, we must recognize
that what seems to us the orderly development of institutions is
rational and orderly, precisely because men have been constantly
trying new expedients and have deliberately retained those institutions
and practices which stand the test of experience. The very
expression "survival of the fittest" implies in human history a
constant testing of new variants, as it does in the animal world,
with this difference, however, that in the animal world the changes
are brought about by the so-called forces of nature, which is
another way of saying that, like Topsy, "they just growed," while
in history most of the changes have been produced by a conscious
effort of the human mind to bring about results. This is none
the less true because few individuals at the time have a sufficiently
broad grasp of what is happening and a sufficiently profound
knowledge of the world to know whither they are tending.
Economic science, after a period of public favor in which its
generalizations enjoyed considerable confidence, seems to have
gone through two rather distinct phases. When it found itself
unable to grapple with many of the problems of the day, it was
derided as the "dismal science" by impatient reformers. More
recently, since it has begun to interest itself more in practical
questions, it seems to be enjoying a popularity, especially in the
United States, which is not without its dangers. It attracts large
classes in our universities; it is being studied in our theological
schools and by our churches; large sums of money are being
spent by our governments in the interest of economic investigations.
The economist must be on his guard against allowing this
present popularity to encourage dilettantism. Our age is growing