To determine what is the correct and constitutional method a
test of correctness is needed. The requirement that representatives
shall be apportioned among the several states according to
their respective numbers cannot be strictly and exactly met. Probably
no two states ever have had or ever will have exactly the same
number of inhabitants to one representative. This fact does not
authorize Congress to disregard the constitutional mandate, but
does oblige it to interpret the phrase by reading into the Constitution
at this point the words "as near as may be," so that the requirement
means, representatives shall be apportioned among the
several states according to their respective numbers as near as
may be. This is the substance of the claim made by Daniel Webster
in his committee report to the Senate in 1832,3 which convinced
that body and ten years later convinced both Houses that
the method of apportionment which had been followed by Congress
theretofore was unsound, if not unconstitutional. A bill drawn in
conformity with Webster's position reached President Tyler in
1842. He finally signed it, but at the same time filed a memorandum
expressing doubts regarding the constitutionality of the innovation.
Since Tyler's day no serious dissent from Webster's position
has been expressed, I believe, either on the floor of Congress or
elsewhere, and it may be accepted as unchallenged. It affords one
criterion whereby the apportionment of representatives to any
state may be tested. If there is doubt, for example, whether State
A is entitled to ten or eleven representatives, three ratios are
needed: (1) the number of persons to one representative in State
A with ten representatives, (2) the same in State A with eleven representatives,
(8) the same in the United States. The nearness of
the first and second ratios to the third, or standard, is then measured,
whichever ratio is nearer to the standard is accepted, and
State A assigned the corresponding number of representatives.
This is the test and the only test which can be derived from
Webster's argument. It is of great help, but it does not completely
solve the problem.

A second test, to be set beside Webster's, is suggested by the
original object of apportionment. This was to give the more
populous states the larger representation in the House to which
their numbers were thought to entitle them and which they did
not receive in the Senate. From the fundamental purpose of apportionment