velopment of water power will retard the trend toward higher
prices of coal; forestry will eventually grow lumber enough to
meet the greatly curtailed demand at higher prices; but, given a
population steadily increasing at anything like the present rate,
and real wages in America must decrease in terms of food, clothing
and fuel, and all the commodities dependent on wood, iron,
copper, and other primary materials. The steady increase alone
of population will offset the popular benefits of the new miracles
of industrial progress.
Declining rate of natural increase.
The percentual rate of increase of population in the United
States has shown a general downward trend since the Civil War.
Before 1860 it had been steadily near 35 per cent each decade;
between 1860 and 1890 it ranged between 30 and 23 per cent;
and in each of the last two decades it has been about 21 per cent.
This downard trend has been tardily following a declining birth
rate. Race suicide, however, is very far from being an imminent
peril for the nation as a whole. The real occasion for disquietude
is that this phenomenon is so largely correlated with education and
with eminent attainment. In many families the birth rate is much
too high for the welfare of the parents, of the children, and of
the community. Recent studies among city populations have
demonstrated that as the number of births in a family passes a
mnoderate limit the mortality increases inordinately.
Our population increased between 1900 and 1910 nearly sixteen.
million people. A much slower rate of growth would realize the
common prediction of a quarter billion in another century, and a
half billion in two centuries. So far as these figures are based on
forecasts of "natural increase" (exclusive of immigration), they
may prove to be largely overestimated. Changes in public opinion,
in social standards, in the means of communication and of education,
in industry, and in family relations, are in rapid progress.
Affecting wider and wider circles, these influences promise to
strengthen greatly the forces making for volitional control of population.
The earlier applications of the doctrine of eugenics
probably will be to control the increase of imental and of physical
defectives. These forces, if not neutralized, will rapidly reduce thne
rate of increase.