from America had been a boon to the European workman as well
as to the American. The year 1896 marked the lowest American
prices in recent decades for food and for farm products. The year
1898 was that of maximum export of foodstuffs from the United
States. Since 1896 food and other farm products have almost
steadily advanced in price at a more rapid rate than general
prices; since 1898 exports of foodstuffs from the United States
have less steadily, but none the less surely, declined. In the past
twenty years the general progress in science and the technical arts
has been phenomenal. It is the accepted economic belief that the
trend and effect of such changes is favorable to the real wages of
labor. The last twenty years, therefore, should have been a period
of rapidly rising wages had not this technical progress been offset
by some powerful opposing forces. Why have real wages risen so
slowly or even fallen? In part no doubt the explanation may be
found in the fact that when the general scale of prices is rising
wages move more tardily. In large part the explanation must
be found in the fact that we have passed the point of diminishing
returns in the relation of our population to our resources. The
growth of population is serving to neutralize for the masses of
the people the gains of technical progress. It is high time to revise
the optimistic American doctrine of population.
Extravagant esti'mates of future population.
The public is accustomed to the estimates of enormous population
possible on the present area of this country. These estimates
express to many, perhaps to most Americans, not only the possible
but also the inevitable and desirable increase. They ask: why
should not an area almost equal to that of Europe support 400,-
000,000 instead of one fourth that number? We have little more
than thirty inhabitants per square mile. France and AustriaHungary
have each a population over six times as dense, Switzerland
eight times, Germany and Italy ten times, the Netherlands
fifteen times, and Belgium twenty-two times. We have but to equal
Italy to support a population of a billion. We have but to equal
Belgium to support two and a quarter billions. But if we could
conceivably support such a future population on the present area
it would be in what manner, with what gain to civilization and at
what cost to the popular welfare?
Take the German Empire as a standard of comparison. Despite
the great material advances in Germany of late, the real wages of