However, it would probably not be'very difficult to convince the
average audience that family affection really has a place in the
economy of nature. It seems to supply a motive which leads men
to do what would, without it, be contrary to their individual or
particular interests, in favor of the interest of the species. The
future members of our race have a vital interest in what we do,
but they have no voice to persuade us, or bribe to offer us. They
have, nevertheless, an advocate with us, to appeal powerfully to
our wills to persuade us to do what is necessary for their salvation.
That persuasive advocate is domesticity.
It seems to have been pretty well demonstrated that the human
race succeeds better when it hunts in packs or works in groups
than when it hunts or works as individuals. In the long run, the
well-being of the species seems to depend about as definitely upon
the existence of some large group, variously called state or nation,
as upon the small group called the family. Without a sentiment
of nationality it would be about as difficult to preserve the larger
group as it would be to preserve the smaller group without a sentiment
of domesticity. They who lack national sentiment find it as
difficult to frame arguments in favor of sacrificing individual for
national interests as they who lack family sentiment find it to
frame arguments in favor of sacrificing individual for family interests.
In neither case do men find themselves wise enough or virtuous
enough to safeguard the future interests of mankind. Lacking
these sentiments, they build only as well as they know; possessing
them, they build better than they know.
Even though we possess the family sentiment, few of us are wise
enough to plan as wisely for our descendants three generations in
the future as we do for ourselves. None of us is wise enough to
plan for those who are to live a hundred, or even ten, generations
hence. The feebleness and shortsightedness of the intellect is here
supplemented by the generous sentiment of nationality. It is
through this sentiment that we are led, "as by an invisible hand,"
to safeguard the interests of that vast majority which never votes
for the excellent reason that it is not born yet. Without this
sentiment we should each of us join in the query, What has posterity
ever done for me that I should do anything for posterity?
Self-interest, even when widened so as to include one's own immediate
flesh and blood, will not lead us to safeguard the interests
of that vast unborn majority. The sentiment of nationality,
the love of country, pride in its growth and prosperity, the desire