never had in our country those great disturbances which have
been caused by the wars of religion in Europe. Thus in the very
nature of the case economic considerations were predominant.
Another factor entering into European history, though it has
existed in our country, has also played a much less important part.
I refer to racial prejudice. It is true that we have not been free
from this curse, but we have fortunately thus far been spared
wars of races and great racial antagonisms, such as are constantly
arising to pit the Teuton against the Latin or against the Slav
in Europe.
Economic forces have had a wonderfully free play in our country
on account of its newness and, therefore, the absence of institutions
and traditions which resist a change in older communities.
Hence if we look at many of our early laws, such as the Massachusetts
Body of Liberties, we shall see that they deliberately
adopt certain economic ideals which they endeavor to make the
rule of conduct in the commonwealth.
If economic questions were prominent in the settlement of our
country, they have gained in prominence throughout our development.
Most of our political questions have turned upon economic
interests or economic ideals. I need but refer to the
slavery question with all of its many ramifications and complications,
resulting in the Missouri Compromise, the Fugitive Slave
Law, the Compromise of 1850, and the Civil War. I need but
refer to the controversies about the United States Bank, the
endless controversies about the tariff, the currency, the public
lands, and, more recently, regarding immigration, the organization
of labor, and the regulation of railroads and other corporations,
to show what an important part economic questions have
played in our internal development.
Other countries have, it is true, their own economic problems
which they are trying to solve by legislation. But the United
States has the transcendent advantage as an experiment station
of being composed of a group of states each of which legislates
upon a very large range of topics. To a certain extent it shares
this peculiarity with other modern federal states, whose constitutions
are more or less modelled upon ours, such as the Swiss
Republic, the German Empire, Canada, the Australian and South
African commonwealths. But we have the advantage over the
British colonies of a longer historv, and over the European nations