truth he brought to public attention. Yet he was a man of
gentle spirit, far from harsh and unsympathetic. Approaching
the question solely with the purpose of the student without political
or commercial bias, he became the agent in advancing, if
not in originating, the humanitarian and democratic treatment
of the population problem. That problem is to determine the
best proportion between the number of inhabitants and the area
and resources of a land, judged with reference to the abiding
welfare of the great mass of the people of the nation.
English population doctrine in the 19th century.
When Adam Smith wrote, he could cite many evidences of the
rise of real wages during the course of the eighteenth century.
Twenty-two years later Malthus wrote in a time of war, of nearfamine,
of increasing population, and of decreasing prosperity for
the masses. The forty years that followed were a period of
misery unequalled in modern times for the working classes of
Britain. In this time in England the dominant opinion accepted,
the Malthusian doctrine as the explanation of what was happening,
and derived from it conservative and pessimistic conclusions
as to the popular welfare. Some social corollaries of the doctrine
were however drawn by James Mill and other Radicals and
were restated by J. S. Mill in his Political Economy in 1848. He
showed the benefits to the laborers in the limitation of their numbers,
whereas Malthus had never ceased to regard population as
well-nigh fatalistically determined. By a turn of fate the circumstances
of that very time largely robbed of practical interest
Mill's views on the subject. Things had already taken a turn for
the better. The worst evils of the factory system were in course
of being remedied, the sanitation of cities was improving, the
laborers were better organized, the rate of growth of population
was slackening, and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 had
prepared the way for the cheapening of the food of the people
even in a period of rising wages following the gold discoveries.
Cooperating with these influences, the improvement of transportation
was opening up new sources of food supplies on virgin soils
and making them available to the markets of western Europe. In
the following half century the real wages and general welfare of
the masses, alike in western Europe and in the United States,
were to advance almost steadily. This whole movement was well
under way when Mill was writing. In such a period as that, the