la tion, shall be the dominating principle of civilization at a
particullar period, depends on which one of them is likely, under
existing conditions of knowledge and resources, most largely to
promiote welfare. When evils flow from the too extensive application
of the prevailing principle, or, when, in new circumstances,
it is less productive of welfare, emphasis is gradually shifted until
the otlher principle occupies the foreground and becomes the dominating
force. Such is the situation now. Conditions have changed
so that the necessity and value of regulation are emphasized again.
The reSgime of personal freedom of competition un-der the conditions
of rapid scientific discovery and material growth has failed
to preserve, or perhaps to produce, the equality necessary for
success among competitors. Growing population, the development
of vast resources, the great size of units of industry, have
made the applicatioa of the competitive principle in many ways
impracticable. Competition has degenerated at many points fronm
a struggle between equals to an exploitation of the weak by the
strong. Industry has been swallowed up by industry until in
many lines a practical monopoly exists, so that prices, wages,
terms of employment, and the welfare of large numbers of people,
are in the control of comparativelv few. The benefits of the common
heritage of natural resources hbae passed too largely from
the people at large. On all sides we find private monopolies and
a natural system of capitalistic industry, inIvolvin g large control
of the opportunity for livelihood for the many. These evils bave
been produced, under conditions favorable to the acquisition of
great wealth and its massing under the corporate principle, by
a svsTtem that gave the world a "democratic constitution," "the
sa me law for all," "toleration," "capitalistic competition," "individual
initiative," and the otber benefits of liberalism. In more
general terms, the causes for the extension of government control
are: the ill-doing of some under the competitive system; our desire
for rapid national development, which led us to give large powers
to those who were to assume the risks of frontier promotionpowers
which, then innocuous, have niow become dangerous-; a
demand for a better standard of living by the great body of the
working class, who are asking with some show of reason what the
advances in science and industry have done for them. Moreover,
there is a feeling of resentmenit of control by others of their
opportunity to make a living.
The demand for state regulati-on either for the purpose of