bers," and the other that "each state shall have at least one
representative."
Between 1790 and 1911, inclusive, two fundamentally different
methods of apportionment were employed, one method in seven
apportionments and the other in six. It is theoretically possible,
of course, that the two methods may be equally good or equally bad,
but probably one method is better than the other and possibly one
method is wrong and the o(ther right. The two methods differ in
that one, which I will venture to call the method of an assumed
ratio, starts from an assumed number of persons to one representative,
the number being usually but not necessarily a whole number
of hundreds or thousands; and the other. which, but for the fact
that it has long been called the Vinton method from the name of
the representative who introduced it, inight be named, in contrast
to the first, the method of a computed ratio, starts from an assumed
number of representatives in the House and computes the
average number of persons to a representative by dividing the
constitutional or representative population of the United States
by that number. The quotient is then used as a divisor for the
population of each of the states, a representative is apportioned
for each unit in the resulting series of quotients, the sum of which
under all ordinary circumstances is less than the number of representatives
to be apportioned, the remainders are arranged in order
of size, and a representative assigned to each in succession until the
desired total is secured. This method sometimes leaves one or more
mnajor fractions, or fractions larger than onie half, witlhout an additional
representative anid sometimes gives an additional representative
for one or more minor fractions, results which have been serious
stumbling-blocks to Congress but are inherent in the method.
The Vinton method was used at every census between 1850 and
1900, inclusive; the method of an assumed ratio was used at every
census between 1790 and 1840, inclusive, and again in 1910. The
latter method has taken two forms, one in which all fractions after
division are disregarded in the apportionment, and the other in
which all fractions larger than one half entitle the states wherein
they occur to an additional representative. These two may be
called the method of rejected fractions and the method of major
fractions.
After this preliminary clearing of the ground my main thesis
may be stated as follows: The method of major fractions is the
correct and constitutional method of apportionment.