for American speculation to collect the savings, the
surplus capital of Americans, for investment abroad.
Yet our land differs from Europe. Europe is both overpopulated
and overinvested, compared with ourselves. Germany could
be crowded into one or two of our greater states. From the national
standpoint we need to keep American capital at home.
From the speculative standpoint it will not stay at home. We
may refuse to protect it abroad, with the idea of forcing it to
stay at home; but that will not suffice. It will then merely seek
the cover of that flag, or that alliance of flags, which comes out
victorious in the present war.

This, then, is the momentous issue into which our surplus capital
and our high investment values with their corresponding low
rates of profit have brought us. Wars in the past have been
fought over exports of products and annexations of territory.
These issues are, of course, present in this war, but, more important
for the future is the issue of investment in backward
countries, of lending our savings to foreigners-the export of
capital as well as the export of products.
Yet our country needs our surplus capital. We cannot prohibit
it from going abroad. We can only compete with the international
speculative financier who invites it to go abroad.
And this competition can be met only by the state in its several
divisions of local, state, and federal governments. Already the
federal government has begun to compete. The irrigation and
reclamation projects, the subsidies to industrial education-in
these cases the state is using its taxing power in such a way as
to divert the possible savings of the people away from the international
financier and into the development of our own resources.
The government has this advantage over the financier-it can
force savings to be diverted by means of the taxing power, and
it can induce them to come at lower rates of interest on its own
bonds or on the bonds that it guarantees. And with the high
values and consequently high initial investments now required it
is only this power to get capital by taxation or at low rates of
interest that can make possible, on a sufficiently large scale, these
internal improvements.

Not only a far-reaching system of rural credits, of land reclamation,
and of local highways, but also a huge extension of railways,
is a pressing need. It is estimated that the railways will
require, within the next ten years, over a billion dollars a year of