plate, would surely follow. I have presented a mere description
of what awaits us in the near future if our present legal system,
with its worn out individualism and doctrines of contract and
competition, could be retained for a considerable period. But
fortunately, as already indicated, it is neither socially desirable
nor practically possible to maintain this system unamended.
It is true that the economists have not yet formulated a definite
scheme of reform, and equally true that those who profit financially
by the present system think they are unalterably opposed to any
change. Nevertheless, all the more important economists have had
their faith in the existing system profoundly shaken. In fact, the
laissez-faire doctrine has been repudiated, hence the endless con-
fusion in economic doctrines and teaching in America today.
We have rejected the old and have not yet discovered and
formulated the new. We may still believe that wages are deter-
mined by demand and supply, but we are all now convinced that
what the demand or what the supply will be at any particular time
depends largely on the customs, institutions, constitutions, and
laws of the land, and not on any merely abstract a priori, philoso-
phical, or metaphysical speculations as to the economic man. We
are now trying to work out such a social control over demand and
supply as to make them what it is socially desirable they should be.
Let us ask once more whether there are any natural forces that
can be relied upon to bring about the re'organization now admitted
to be necessary if we are to make economic and social progress.
Let us ask further whether such a needed readjustment means, as
we are so often told, the destruction of private property and even
of existing wealth, with the consequent decay of our civilization.
Does such a change necessarily involve socialism, communism, or
any other form of organization inconsistent with the maintenance
of private property, retaining in private property all the elements
which have in practice proved themselves conducive to the general
welfare?
The chief emphasis today is on human welfare. While we have
come to realize that we may at any one moment urge on our eco-
nomic production at such a rate as to destroy the possibilities of
similar production in the future, the doctrine of human welfare
as against the abstract doctrine of natural production and dis-
tribution under a system of unrestrained competition simply means
such a change in our philosophy, and such a modification of
private property through law reform, as will put into operation