an answer, and the answer is a kind of specific against the very
evils of the pork-barrel that drove America into the lap of laissez
faire. The answer is that the new capital be raised by various
kinds of special benefit assessments on all kinds of property or
income that are specially benefited by the activities of local, state,
and federal governments; that taxes be reduced or discontinued
on those forms of industry that are not specially benefited and
that therefore must compete with the international financier for
new capital that can flow anywhere on the world market; and,
finally, that the state employ its borrowing power, backed by its
taxing power, to buy and operate those essential and basic industries,
whether higlhways, railways, mines, forests, or waterpowers,
upon which all industries depend for materials, for mechanical
power, and for markets.
These may rightly be said to be the lessons both of the war and
of American democracy.
I do not overlook the fact which originated and now supports
our laissez-faire theory, namely, the incompetency of government
to administer a public business. Just because our pork-barrel
theory encourages individuals and classes to logroll and get all
they can out of government without giving much in return, it
follows that they wish to see an inefficient government that cannot
protect itself against them. But when we realize that our liberty
and property depend upon a competent civil service and an expert
administration of government, then we make sacrifices and pay
attention in order to strengthen that administration. Thousands
of our successful business men, professional men, and labor leaders,
through their service on councils of defense and other public bodies,
are now learning both the vital importance of public business and
the reasons for its incompetency; and government officials are
learning that they cannot administer public business without the
assistance of these same representative private citizens.
Our inefficiency is a state of mind, a pork-barrel theory; a
laissez-faire philosophy. By reason of it we have built up great
private interests whose speculative profits render them hostile to
a strong and efficient government, except wlhere it helps them.
By a different state of mind we are already building up great
public interests that require and are beginning to get tlhe co6peration
of private interests.
But it is also objected that these are the teaclhings and devices,
not of American democracy, but of German auitocracy, whose