One phase of this situation found no consideration in the days
of laissez-faire, and has in fact but very recently attracted attention.
By this I mean that when inequality of bargaining power
has reached that point where competition is highly unequal we have
exploitation of the weak by the strong, without any violation of
law. Again, under our theories of competition we actually depress
the weaker members of society to a point at which we kill the goose
that lays the golden egg by preventing these people from becoming
and remaining efficient workers, and still more by preventing them
from bringing up their children with sufficient general skill and energy
to enable the economic production of the nation to be kept up.
Nor is this an evil that either cures, or even tends to cure, itself in
the absence of a strong, conscious social action on the part of the
state. Hence, the widespread agitation for a legal minimum wage
as a basis of maintaining the American standard of living. How
strange it would seem to the economists of even half a century
ago, with the theories then held of property rights and competition,
to come upon such a book as Hollander's The Abolition of
Poverty. For the economists of half a century ago believed that
"the poor we have always with us" and that poverty is as necessary
as profits as a spur to economic production. Under that
philosophy hunger and the fear of starvation gave the same motivation
to economic effort on the part of the poor as profits gave to
the capitalist.

The earlier economists would doubtless be equally shocked by
such a book as Ely's Property and Contract, which maintains that
property is a social creation, and a social concept, and that private
property should be neither acquired nor used in a manner injurious
to the public welfare. The earlier economists would have deserted
their ship had they come upon Taussig's statement that private
property is now on trial and that its sole justification is that it
conduces to the economic and social welfare of the people, and that
the day is already come when private property with its existing
rights and liniitations can no longer be assumed, but must prove its
right to further existence. This is an entire shifting of the burden
of proof from the not remote days when private property with its
present connotation was assumed without any question.
Perhaps the early economists would fail entirely to understand
such a book as Hobson's Wealth and Welfare: a Human Valuation,
or Veblen's The Instinct of Workmanship,-the first attempting
to prove the necessity of an entire shifting of the emphasis