inventing, so the workman can be motivated also by quite different
motives from the ordinary pay-envelope motive. I refer to the
creative and other impulses emphasized at this session by Mr.
Robert B. Wolf and others, and by Miss Marot and Ordway Tead
in their books, as well as a year ago in our Philadelphia meeting
by the late Professor Carleton Parker (whose important pioneer
work will, I hope, never be forgotten).
The war affords us a great object lesson here. Men previouslv
apathetic in the shop, under the money motive, have exhibited a
wonderful eagerness to fight for their country with no wages to
speak of and with no money bonus whatever. Again, when the
armistice was signed, this wonderful "morale" shrank appreciably
overnight. Still again, we find that many of the soldiers who return
to work after the excitements of military life are actually
spoiled as workmen. We must find ways of putting real "pep"
into the worker-for his sake as well as others'. Perhaps a wiser
employment management can and will spread over the country as
a result of the war and, in particular, of the studies of the War
Industries Board with its 13 courses and 275 graduates fitted
thereby to become employment managers. Perhaps the labor men
can take the initiative. Either or both might happen through
several agencies, including the Industrial Department of the Y.
M. C. A.
We economists ought to be able to play an important
part, in co6peration with psychologists, employers, and employees,
by studying this new movement, distilling out the essential truths
it represents, and contributing constructive suggestions of our
own. The psychologist and the religious workers helped vastly in
creating our soldiers' morale. Cannot the morale needed in industry
be secured with equal success? If we can and do secure it,
it will be by making industry really democratic. And if we do
secure it, the productivity of industry will be greatly increased
because those who have its success at heart and put their own interest
and initiative into that success will include the millions of
workers and not merely the thousands of employers.
Here again the war teaches us a great lesson. The miraculous
accomplishments of the United States were due not to a centralized
organizing genius, such as created German military power in forty
years, but to a decentralized cooperation whereby each citizen, of
his own initiative, tried to do his "bit." Not only was the war a
triumph of democracy over autocracy but it demonstrated the efficiency