we go into our large cities, under the most favorable conditions,
we shall find that we have only begun to make progress in the
direction of the technical training of our youthful population,
which I have indicated as a necessary element in such a scheme of
education as I have proposed.
Now my next proposition is that a system of education which
is to accomplish the things I have sketched out, and really become
effective in this large sense for an increase in national production,
must be national in scope. That is, it must reach everybody
throughout the entire extent of national territory. It must be
national in its support, that is, the nation must assist in carrying
the burdens of such a scheme, and not leave it altogether to the
locality or the state; and it must be national in its ideals. In other
words, it must have before itself as animating it, underlying it,
permeating it, crowning it, if you will, the idea of developing to
the highest possible extent the nation whose instrumentality it is.
We have thus far, with some exceptions which I shall note later,
depended for the evolution of our educational system largely upon
the good will and public spirit of private benefactors, God bless
their names! and upon the more or less haphazard inclination of
localities or states, spurred on in certain directions as they have
been by national legislation.
Now we cannot safely rely upon the desire of the local com-
munity to work out an adequate educational system. Our history
has shown that there have been whole states, which for long
periods of time, have done absolutely nothing toward the develop-
ment of an adequate educational system. There are today com-
munities in every American state which, if they were permitted
by law to do so, would practically abolish even the elementary
school, which gives the modicum of opportunities, characteristic
of a backward, one-room country school. We must as a nation
have a definite policy looking toward the development of our
educational facilities, if we are within our day and generation
to see results at all commensurate with what would be perfectly
possible under the inspiration and working of such a system.
It is furthermore not fair to insist that the locality or even
the state shall bear the entire burden of such an educational
system. There is no function which has been thus far left or
delegated to the locality or to the state more truly national in
its scope than is education. The remotest school district in the
mountains of Georgia or Tenne-ssee may by great sacrifice support