ciency of the democratic method, that is, the method which relies
on enlisting the active initiative, the enthusiastic interest and will
to help, of the people. The Prussian method has failed and the
Prussian method in American industry has failed and always will.
These problems of industrial discontent are only some of the
great problems now before us.
There is not time even to sketch the others. One of them concerns
the rehabilitation of monetary standards, including not
simply resumption of specie payments and restoration of pars of
exchange but maintenance of purchasing power. I have often
spoken and written on this theme. Here, as always, we must beware
of the bias-and I am sorry to say, I know of one economist
who has not escaped it-of special interests, whether of the gold
miner or silver miner or of the creditor or debtor-interests.
The great field of social insurance for workingmen and especially
the next step-Health Insurance-should also engage our
attention. Here, likewise, we must steer clear of the bias of the
employer, the trade union, the insurance company, or the medical
profession.
The problem of demobilization, especially the problem of preventing
unemployment during the period of readjustment and the
problem of the future occupation in industry or settlement on
land of our soldiers, especially those invalided, are also before us.
These and other problems of reconstruction are the basis of our
meeting this year, as our program shows. The thoughts we receive
at this annual meeting should help all of us who are in earnest
to reach conclusions on these topics, if not here and now, soon
afterward, and so be of service in shaping American policy in the
immediate future.
In order that our influence may be fully exerted, I believe two
new agencies are needed-one designed to diffuse such economic
knowledge as we possess among the people who do not possess it,
and the other designed to increase that knowledge.
At present we college men are, in a sense, teaching the wrong
people. We reach a college audience which is not only small but
is, I think most teachers will agree, less in need of our elementary
teachings than the general public.
An urgent need, in my opinion, is some organized machinery for
diffusing economic principles among the masses of our population.
The common people, whose ideas will, more and more, rule
the world, are in crying need of competent instruction in economics,
simplified and reduced to its lowest terms.