disposal, provided, of course, he does so openly, and provided the
business is legitimate, that is, provided his activities are not inconsistent
with the general welfare.

Academnic economists, from their very openmindedness, are apt
to be carried off, unawares, by the bias of the community in which
they live.

Economists whose social world is Wall Street are very apt to
take the Wall Street point of view, while economtists at state universities
situated in farming districts are apt to be partisans of
the agricultural interests.

The economists of a century ago were unconsciously writing
from the standpoint of the employer rather than from that of
the employee, as was shiown by their references to labor as an expense
of production. Today, on the contrary, as labor is increasing
in power, we find many economists are, consciously or unconsciously,
taking the point of view of the laborer. This comes
closer to being the democratic, humanitarian, or public point of
view, but is often in real antagonism to it. Trade unionism, socialism,
and even Bolshevism, syndicalism, or I. W. W.ism have
occasional champions or apologists among economists. Socialism
especially h-as enlisted under its banner a motley group of theorists
eager for some realization of their humanitarian intentions.
In a sense, of course, "we are all socialists nowadays." But what
should give us pause before enrollilng under that banner is that, in
reality, it is the red flag of class war. Whatever we may say
of theoretical socialism of various types, and however muclh we
may and ought, in my opinlion, to favor in some form an increase
of socialized industry, the great fact remains that the socialist
group derives its real strengtlh from class antagonism. This is
even truer of the I. W. W. A few weeks ago a workman in the
I. W. W. wrote me: "Nothing could give me a greater pleasure
than to have an opportunity to exterminate from the globe every
capitalist. That time is coming, thank God !" The Dutch minister
at Petrograd recently said: "Translated into practice, the
Bolsheviki principles are 'high wages for no work, the taking of
others' property without punishment, and no taxation.'"
There can be little doubt that we are facing a great peril today,
the peril of perverting the democracy for which we have just been
fighting with such devotion.

It is our opportunity and our duty to dedicate ourselves to the
task of working out economic ineasuires in the interests of humanity