 Economics and The Law 21 
 To sum up: The old system has broken down, not because com- 
 petition has disappeared or ceased to be important, but because 
 the increasing inequalities of wealth, with the added facilities for 
 combination, have made it impossible for the great mass of the 
 people to compete on equal terms. "Under present conditions," 
 as Walker says, "the game is played with loaded dice." At the 
 same time, the constitution with its system of checks and balances 
 has not expanded rapidly enough to enable us to meet the changed 
 economic and social conditions satisfactorily. On the other hand, 
 centuries of free schooling, free right of assembly, free speech, 
 freedom of religious thought, extended suffrage, and the increased 
 means of transferring persons, goods, and intelligence, have in- 
 creased enormously the ability of the poorer classes to combine 
 for political action. From this it follows, logically, that so soon 
 as the dissatisfaction reaches a certain point political power must 
 pass to the majority,8 that is to the working and non-propertied 
 classes, whose members are becoming more and more class conscious. 
 Furthermore, notwithstanding the great inequality in fortune, the 
 working classes have sufficient interest in the outcome to give them 
 hope and courage to work together for a re6rganization of society. 
 In spite of great divergence of opinion among them, there is a 
 common feeling that, in the long run, economic reform can come 
 only through political action. It is inconceivable that they should 
 come into political power and not use that power for bringing 
 about, through the state, the only organization including all the 
 people, such economic changes as public opinion considers desira- 
 ble in the common interest. When this idea is broached, we hear 
 much of the danger of revolution, destruction of property, and 
 the decay of civilization. 
 As against such dire prophecies, certain considerations should 
 not be overlooked. First, the working people have been trained 
 in political action and self-restraint for too many generations, and 
 understand how much easier, safer, and more satisfactory such 
 action is than violence. In the next place, they have too much at 
 stake to risk it all on such a doubtful venture. 
 Notwithstanding the spectacle that Europe offers us today, the 
 a "It is a chimerical hope to overpower or outnumber the middle class whatever 
 modes of voting, whatever redistribution of the constituencies are really neces- 
 sary for placing the government in their hands. Those, whether we like it or 
 not, they will assuredly obtain."-J. S. Mill, Dis8ertations, II, p. 155. 
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:47:14 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 