community. But if such an inefficient competitor is not in a con-
dition to make this change without'total or even great loss, com-
petition has to that degree ceased to be effective. Under such
conditions, until the existing fixed capital is worn out, or until
demand has increased, by the growth of society, so as to require the
use of both plants at profitable prices, attempts at so-called com-
petition are not competition at all in the Ricardian sense, and
have none of the virtues ascribed to competition as the natural
regulator of industry and as a protector to the consumer. In the
face of these facts we invent various doctrines of so-called monopo-
lies and begin to consider these exceptions to our rules.
But the taking of the so-called utilities, including the common
carriers, out of the categories of competition and freedom of con-
tract, does not bring the readjustment of the doctrines of private
property into consonance with the popular ethical sentiments re-
lating to the rights of property in a rapidly growing and changing
civilization. Therefore, just as the decision (Chisholm vs. Georgia,
1793) that a citizen may sue a state was answered immediately by
an agitation for amendment prohibiting such suit, and within four
years by the adoption of such an amendment, so immediately
after the Dartmouth College case the people began to forbid, by
constitutional amendment where that seemed practicable, and by
general statutes where amendment was difficult, the granting of
any corporate charters without the specific reservation on the part
of the legislature to alter, amend, or appeal the same. This, of
course, did not reach charters previously granted.
In the absence of a constitutional amendment, it remained for
the courts to step in and relax the rigors of the Dartmouth College
case by strained interpretation. This was done by introducing the
doctrine of the police power, which is by implication superimposed
upon and made a part of all contracts. The New York courts
entered first upon this practice, but it was taken up within a
decade by the federal Supreme Court. This was a great extension
and an entirely new application of the police power.' The full
significance however of such application did not appear until more
than a generation later.
This doctrine cut deep into the theory of the Dartmouth College
case; but, what is much more significant, it placed once for all, until
I Cf. The Police Power, Public Policy and Constitutional Rights, by Ernest
Freund (1904), Preface, p. v. "The law of the police power is practically
a growth of the last thirty or forty years and much of it remains unsettled."