logic of the situation forces different views and a different attitude
upon him.

The change in the point of view produces some of its widest
divergences of opinion on the question of government regulation
and control. When we think primarily in terms of our own satisfactions
we are rather intolerant of government regulation when
it affects us directly. We may be very tolerant of, or favorable
toward, government regulation of other people; but as for ourselves,
we want none of it. We are all consumers, therefore regulation
of consumption is abhorent. The regulation or control of
some particular line of business is a different matter, especially if
it is not our business. Yet habits of consumption are quite as
important to the welfare of the nation, considered as a nation, as
methods of business. It is generally believed that nations have
deteriorated quite as frequently and quite as rapidly because
of their bad habits of consumption as because of the bad methods
of any or of all classes of business men. When one takes the
national point of view, that is a consideration of the verv greatest
importance. Those academic distinctions between regulation of
consumption and regulation of production seem trivial in comparison.
As a matter of observed fact, the people who think in
terms of nationality are just as prone to legislate on matters of
consumption as on matters of business. The government regulation,
or prohibition, of the consumptioni of alcohol, is quite the
most popular and democratic movement in this country today,
particularly among those who have been here long enough to develop
a sense of nationality. Again, as a matter of observed fact,
whenever a nation is, in the vernacular, "up against the real
thing," when its very existence as a nation is at stake, and when
it is forced to think in terms of nationality, it always finds it just
as necessary that its government should regulate consumption- as
that it should regulate production.

Another and even nmore striking examnple of this divergence of
opinion is found in our attitude toward control or regulation of
speech. I inake my living by talking, as do a fair percentage of
the active members of this Association. We are therefore unable,
most of us, to see any reason why the government should regulate
our business. We are pretty strong for freedom of speech andl
freedom of the press and all other euphemisms for a laissez-faire
policy with respect to the business of talking. It also happens,
curiously enough, that they whose business is talking are the
strongest advocates of the abandonment of the laissez-faire policy