from private gain to public welfare, that is, social well-being, and
the latter undertaking to prove that present methods of production
are at cross purposes with the controlling and impelling
instincts of mankind.

For centuries we have had now and then such books, but never
before by professional economists of standing. Yet these are the
books that are today not only receiving the most popular attention,
but the ones that are actually marking out the path, however
imperfectly, which economics must follow if it is to be more than
a system of intellectual gymnastics or to have any effect on practical
life.

Our free land has heretofore obscured the real tendencies of our
economic development. This fixed, on the one hand, a definite
minimum below which economic well-being could not be pressed and
thus maintained a definite standard of life. On the other hand, it
offered opportunities to vast numbers of people to make individual
fortunes, and thus to rise to the capitalistic class. This kept alive
that speculative spirit and hope so conducive to energy, enterprise,
and economic efficiency and production.

The wage system as at present interpreted in our legal doctrines
with the gates of opportunity closed by the complete appropriation
of natural resources and by the weakened bargaining power of the
individual in the uneducated, non-propertied, working classes, presents
quite a different spectacle. These changed conditions raise
questions of vast import.

We have passed recently, slowly, haltingly, and against great
obstacles presented by the courts, to legislation protecting women,
children, and finally adult men, as to accidents, workmen's compensation,
hours, and conditions of employment. However, the
final attitude of the courts on much of this legislation remains to
be worked out. But whatever the final view of the courts on
workmen's compensation and the minimum wage may be, the economists
and the general public, at least, have made up their minds,
once and for all, that so far as these subjects are concerned the
working classes are no longer subject to helpful or beneficent competition
or the freedom of individual contract. We have very
grudgingly admitted the usefulness of the collective bargaining
brought about by labor unions as a necessary and desirable brake
to check by united action the further disturbing of this equilibrium
until we can develop a state which is strong enough to represent
the social welfare and insure the progress of the nation. Competition