tween the large and the small ;states. That the Vinton method
has a tendency, slight but persistent, to over-represent the large
states is demonstrable. The tendency may be illustrated by the
difference between the results of the two methods applied to 357
members. The Vinton method of 1900 gave Colorado and Florida
each 2 representatives, while the method of major fractions gave
them 3; the Vinton method gave Michigan 12 and Texas 15,
while the method of major fractions gave Michigan 11 and Texas
14. Which is correct? The standard is the assumed or computed
ratio, the two differing slightly but each indicating 48 representatives
to 10,000,000 people. If each of the small states received
3 seats, their ratio would be 56 to 10,000,000, an excess of 8;
if each received 2, their ratio would be 38 to 10,000,000, a
shortage of 10. Obviously the result giving each of them 3,
reached by the method of major fractions, is "as near as may be."
Obviously, too, the Vinton method results in under-representing
the small states.
For the populous states the outcome depends upon whether the
assumed or the computed ratio is made the standard. If the assumed
ratio is accepted, then to apportion the smaller numbers to
the populous states gives to those states ratios nearer the standard,
but if the computed ratio is accepted, there is a very slight balance
in favor of the larger numbers. Even if the computed ratio is used,
however, the net balance tips in favor of assigning the two seats in
question to the smaller states. The result is confirmed by examining
the figures for each state separately. Our analysis of this
examiple, then, shows that the Vinton method unjustly, and therefore
unconstitutionally, under-represents the small states and
over-represents the large ones. These results might be confirmed,
if there were time, by making a similar examination of the apportionment
of 386 seats in 1900 under the two methods. It would
show also that the apportionment of 386 seats by the method of
major fractions gives exactly the results which Congress secured
illegitimately, as we then believed, by starting with the Vinton table
for 384 and adding two for disregarded major fractions. This is
an indication that the instinctive judgment of Congress guided
them to the right goal although they started on a wrong road.
A method theoretically sound should establish the balancing
point between two consecutive numbers of seats, or the size of
the fraction entitling the state to another seat, at the middle
point or arithmetic mean and not at the geometric mean. This