of fewer historical institutions and racial antagonisms, which
interfere with the strictly economic effects, while, as compared
with any one of these states, we have the advantage of a larger
number of units and tlherefore of a broader application of the
method of differences. Economicallv our country may be likened
to a hospital with forty-six general wards, each under separate
medical direction, and a large central ward for certain selected
cases, while a number of outlying pavilions and annexes under still
different systems are loosely connected with the central institution.
What an opportunity this offers the economist who will carefully
study the results of different kinds of treatment.
It is not only in official experimentation through legislation and
administration that our country is rich. It has also been the
happy hunting ground of social Utopias. In many cases it has
been their burying ground as well. Many of these, like the communities
of Mormons, Shakers, the Oneida Community, etc.,
have had a religious or moral ideal. Others, like Brook Farm,
New Harmony, the short-lived Ruskin Colony, the Fairview Colony
of Single Taxers, have been based upon strictly social or economic
ideals. Each of these communities represents on a small
scale a voluntary experiment in some method of combining labor
or of holding land, or of regulating marriage or something of the
kind. The ease with which such Utopias take root in our country
is illustrated by the fact tha-t within two years of the publication
of Looking Backwards more than 500 Bellamy Clubs with a
membership of about 03000 are said to have been established in
California alone.6
The organization of ideal communities which was so popular
in the first part of the nineteenth century seems to be succeeded
in the first part of the twentieth century by an equally enthusiastic
activity in the formation of societies designed to promote some
reform in our public policy. Some of them relate to taxation,
some to the regulation of the liquor traffic, some to labor legislation,
some to conservation, some to land tenure. Each one is a
stimulus urging the legislatures to test by actual experiment the
ideas for which it stands.
Apart from the idealists, we have a great mass of experiments
tried in the self-interest of those who themselves are engaged in