such ways as to prevent the recurrence of some of the evils that
have given rise to the hostility towards corporations.
One inevitable consequence of the establishment of the principle
of government control of economic life must not be lost
sight of even if its early appearance is unlikely. Regulation by
a government which is the people, for the people, tends to be
regulation of the people by a government in spite of the people.
IRegulation of industrial life in behalf of some means repression
of the activities of some others. The government, as such, once
recognized as having a right to regulate economic conditions,
will be pushed by the ruling class or classes towards regulation
or control of the rights of others in politics, religion, and other
ways; for economic privileges or rights cannot crystallize into
custom and be cast into law in behalf of some as against others
without imposing upon the "some" corresponding duties which
become privileges or rights of the "others." This process means
a slow crystallization of economic status and the production of
classes in society.

These, then, are the principal lines of proposed wider government
activity at present before the public, in this country and in
England. Their significance is far reaching. While declaring
no new legal principle, they give a different color to accepted
doctrine. The emphasis is now lo be put upon the rights of the
community in private property and to private property, rather
than on those of the individual owner. The movement means that
the acquirement of property to an extent that may endanger the
public welfare is to be restricted. Laws should be framed, we are
told, to care for the worker rather thian for industry. In other
words, the new movement is an attempt to establish by authority
the individualism-conditions of welfare-which individual action
itself has failed to achieve. The whole movement imports a lessening
of the importance of private property, and a strengthening
of the importance of men; an emphasis of public weal as against
private gain; a demand for more equality in economic conditions,
and greater social responsibility for wealth.