deliberate public opinion; or, as a distinguished lawyer has stated
it, you cannot compel a sovereign state or a whole people to be
moral against its will.
But we are reminded that the wisdom of our fathers decreed by
constitutional enactment that when, by changing popular senti-
ment, the public demands that what is now property legally
acquired ought no longer to be property under the changed ethical
standards, the state should in a constitutional, orderly, and legal
manner, expropriate that property, and pay full value to its present
owners. But the object of private property and the sacredness
of contract is said to be to give to individuals the ability to count
on the future to a degree that will justify them in carrying on
production and making an effort to acquire property, and if such
an assurance cannot be given under some form of constitutional
provision production will cease and civilization will disappear.
Granted that morality requires such a doctrine, and that confisca-
tion is therefore unethical; yet, where public sentiment no longer
permits that to be property which is recognized as property under
the present constitution and laws, the doctrine is vain so long as
you cannot compel the whole people to act against its will. Per-
haps the remedy for this evil is not an attempt at compulsion by
law, but genuine moral education.
If then, we admit for the sake of argument that the content of
property will change, and ought to change from time to time, as
the needs of society change, and that no person and no class of
persons ought to be allowed to hold anything as property when
such holding has come to be harmful to the common weal, let us
see how the matter of compensation in such cases has been dealt
with in the past. This may enable us in some measure at least to
forecast the future, and possibly to avoid serious difficulties.
If we cannot compel a nation to act against its will, whether that
will be good or bad, can we force it to grant compensation in cases
where the night to property in the particular thing is no longer
permitted by public opinion? Is is not probable that the degree to
which compensation can actually be enforced in any case will de-
pend on the extent of the gap at any time which separates actual
conditions from the public judgment of what the present public
welfare demands?2
I "The substance of the law at any given time pretty nearly corresponds so
far as it goes with what is then understood to be convenient: but its form
and machinery and the degree to which it is able to work out desired results
depend very much upon its past."-O. W. Holmes, Jr., The Common Law,, p. 1.