consequently the expected reward to speculation could not be
excessive. In the later period the increase in value of resources
comes to be limited only by the low rates of interest that investors
are willing to accept. The lower the rate of interest the higher
the price the investor is willing to pay for the property that
yields the interest. In the early period speculation served to
develop new resources. I'he nation could afford the high exceptional
rewards, for they added to the national wealth. In the
later period it served to force up the values of resources already
ownled, and in so far does not add to the national wealth, but to
the power of owners to extract a share from the national income.
Yet there remainied still another source of speculative profits.
It was the consolidations, under combinationis and trusts, of resources
already developed. 'the trust financing of later years
could afford to pay high prices for established plants and still
leave a speculative profit, by reason of their new economies and
their new power over prices.
But now this source of speculation is also closing. The former
low speculative values, with their expectation of high profits, are
swallowed up by high investment values satisfied with relatively
low rates of interest. Consequently, within the past decade or
two, it is towards Mexico, Canada, China, Central and South
America, Africa or Russia, where the speculative investment is
low, that American capital has begun to look for high profits and
future increases in the value of property. The frontier has moved
out of our own country and the speculative values of the future
are in the backward countries of the earth.
Here the government again is brought in. If these speculative
values are to be realized, it will be because they are protected by
the diplomacy and ultimately by the military power of the state.
If thus protected, then the stocks and bonds that represent the
low speculative values of these foreign holdings will be sold to
our own people at high investment values based on the lower rates
of interest which investors get at home. Thus the vested right
to military protection abroad will grow with what it feeds upon.
Surely, our government rightly hesitates before it ventures out
on this new frontier. It may be that our demand for the "open
door" will force us hereafter to join with Europe in the protection
of investments in backward countries. An enduring world peace
can scarcely be looked for without both the open door and military
protection for such investments. And this, of course, means opportunity