patented and for sale. Whoever finds it profitable may use them.
If they are used less in other countries it is because the work can
be done miore cheaply by hand under their conditions. The general
level of the use of machinery is largely fixed by the relations
between population and resources, and not by any mysterious
racial talent for machinery. It is the density of population that
mainly explains the contrast in this regard between the people of
Europe on the one hand, and on the other those of the same races
in America, Canada, and Australia.
Popular welfare in America is already threatened. To preserve
the favorable relation of population to resources and to control
in some measure the fate and fortunes of the children of this and
future generations the two most important means possible are:
conservation of national resources, and retarding the rate of increase
of population.
>Seed of a conservation policy.
For the conserv ation movement, that sadly belated attempt to
check national prodigality, let us speak only words of approval.
But we must recognize its limitations. As to minerals, it only
cdelays their inevitable, final exhaustion. At the present rate of
increase of the use of our stores, iron ore will be exhausted in
thirty years, petroleum in ninety years, and coal in one hundred
fiftv years. If, however, the population became stationary, the
periods of possible use would be enormously extended. In the
reclamattion of soil by drainage and irrigation the outlook is that
about 15 per cent may thus be added ultimately to the area in
farms, representing at the most 40 per cent addition to the present
food production by present methods. Even when all this has
been accomplished at much cost it provides barely for two decades
of increase of our population at the present rate, and by 1930 the
natioiial demand for food will again be in the same relation to the
productive area that it now is.
The hope is ever with us that improvements in agricultural
methods will offset the influence of the increase of population. We
rightly speak of the wonders of the new agriculture; but these
improvements fast crowding upon each other in the past two
decades have not even kept the cost of food from increasing in
terms of the common man's wage. Shall we then base an economic
policy on the assumption of much greater improvements which as
yet are only in the realm of imagination? Undoubtedly the de-