The productivity theories have led us to say that each participant
in production is entitled to and gets what he produces, for
the reason that tlhis has seemed to us good ethics. Now society,
in establishing a standard of wages, would assume the theory
that each must get what is necessary to enable him to attain a
living conformable to the dignities and requirements of citizenship.
The proposal is not, "to each one what he produces," but,
"to each one what he needs," on a minimum basis. The British
Minimum Wage Law for miners frankly recognizes this fact. The
ideal of the federation of miners was defined by its representative
in these words: "What their demands stipulated was that when
a man went into the pit to work . . . he should be assured of a
day's wage, fixed and agreed to, and if this was not granted it
should be recoverable through a court of law. No matter what
the collier's failure or difficulty might be in earning his money,
whether it be through faults, breakages in machinery, inundations
of water, shortage of tubs, overcrowding, or a walk of long distances
to the face; if he was not addicted to idleness, then he
should be allowed a fixed minimum wage." "The descending of
the pit and the remaining at the coal face to do a day's work
shall establish the right of the workman to receive the average
wage of the district."
If this policy should become general, the ultimate result would
be the elimination of those who cannot earn the minimum and the
rising of the margin of production for labor to a point where
the product of labor will be equal to the minimum wage fixed by
lawr. In other words, we will have a return to the theory of
specific productivity. No other result is possible.
In passing from my criticism of these proposals, however, I
would remind you that it does not involve the regulation of wages
and prices where these are themselves subject to control by any
class to the detriment of another. Aside from this limitation the
wisdom of government interference in these directions is more
than doubtful.
There is ground for more favorable comment on proposals
that the government shall, within limits, determine the form of
organization and the size of business enterprises. Industries
which are monopolistic in their character are now by general
consent regarded as properly subject to government supervision.
It is not necessary here to discuss the methods or extent of
this supervision further than to say that if it is to be permanently