usefully, but administratively, engaged-one, two, perhaps three names
come to mind as of economists who by circumstance or designation
may seem to have been permitted to exercise what I have ventured to
call formative influence. But closer scrutiny will establish even as to
these, that the notable service which each in his respective field was
able to render was not because but in spite of the range of discretionary
power.
This dispossession of the economist would have resolved itself into a
mere slighting of sensibilities, had it been justified of the result. But
the exhibit here is unmistakable. If we refuse to be flattened out by
the "we won the war" argument, garnished with its "hells" and
"damns," and survive the more subtle "it was necessary under the
circumstances" fallacy, with its aura of officialdom, the unpleasing
fact stands forth that the history of the war discloses a series of
costly economic errors that expert guidance should have avoided.
The four great areas of economic intervention in our war activities
were:
1. Labor adjustment.
2. Price-fixing.
3. Revenue provision.
4. Banking administration.
In each of these, government practice was shaped- ither by deliberate
policy or opportunist drift-independent, even in disregard of the
economist's opinion. In the execution of such practices the economist
was utilized and his influence was exercised. But the formative policy
was elsewhere initiated and the controlling guidance was elsewhere
lodged.
The particulars may be briefly reviewed:
1. The history of labor adjustment in the war is a complex of
opportunist adaptation of a peace-time mechanism, imperfectly comprehended,
to a war-time requirement, inadequately visualized the
whole shot with a premature idealism.
In 1917 the labor world was still the least well-understood part, in
structure and function, of our economic organization. The simpler
magnitudes-distribution, unionization, wage levels, were imperfectly
enumerated, and the deeper elements-the interaction of workers as to
unionism, localities, and trades-were not even apprehended. Where
the expert would have trodden cautiously, the amateur rushed in unhesitatingly.
There resulted a series of wasteful ventures, out of
which the bare concept of a solution-a common labor policy in all
war industry-did not emerge until the war was half over and the
actual realization of which was still unattained when the war was over.
Just as the problem of labor distribution was met with an uninformed