the differences. Only so can the next thinigs get done. Single-taxers
and socialists, for example, should postpone their issues of ultimate institutional
programs-their antithesis of individualistic as against collective
ethical presuppositions-so long as the doctrinal positions concur
in proscribing private property in natural bounty. Only when practical
policies diverge because of differences in theory are theoretical
dissensions to the purpose. When what to do is not at issue, it is folly
to fall to quarreling about why. The immediate problems of progress,
the policies common to programs ultimately divergent, are enough to
absorb all present attention and effort. So long as for every type of
progressive thought, a step is recognized as in the right direction, it is
mere blundering to complicate the case with the issues that can waitthat
as unactual are for the purposes unreal. Go along with your
neighbor till your paths diverge. To the socialist all merchandising
is parasitic. To me, these activities tend merely to proliferate into
extreme wastes. There should then be agreement on measures of limitation-
say, high license taxes. If actual taxation is working regressively
on private wealth and income, socialists and individualists may
unite in efforts toward a system less obnoxious to the ideals of both.
Higher inheritance taxes? Yes, say I, who, in order that the competitive
system may both endure and deserve to endure, would check economic
stratification, would hinder the emergence of differentials and
handicaps: if also the socialist says yes, as directed by his opposition
to private property in general, we can so far work together instead of
at cross purposes. Our differences are not actual. We desire the
same particular thing, the thing at hand, only for different ends.
Join we then to get the thing that we both now want. Later we may
contest in another field. Sufficient unto each day are the quarrels
thereof. I advocate progressive taxation in general in order to mitigate
the economic inequality that in my view is putting in hazard the political
and economic democracy of the competitive order. If to my socialistic
neighbor the same policy appeals as a step toward the abandonment
of the competitive order, it is still true that on either basis of
policy the thing is good. Our hopes diverge merely as to what will
come of it. I would have the officers of justice public functionaries,
and justice free not dear, and therefore only for the rich, and therefore
not justice-as also now I approve of free schools and free police
protection: and all of this not because I am a socialist but because I
am not; because, solicitous to preserve the competive order, I fear and
deplore its inadequacies and excesses. Some among all the things that
the socialist condemns I also condemn, but from the standpoint of another
ideal. Not in denying his criticisms where they are due, but in
admitting and then helping to remove them, is my best service to my