-was cut ofl in its prime by definitive statistical exhibit. The obscurities
of the Pittman Silver Purchase act were illumined and the consequences,
actual and prospective, of that remarkable measure exposed.
The importance of prompt return to normal distributive
methods and ordinary price mechanism was emphasized-in face of
strong resistanice. The penalties of emotionalism in governmental
labor policies were made clear, and, at the same time, bar put to the
exploitation of trade depression in behalf of anti-unionism. Emphatic
as to the error of retaining blunderbuss war taxes in a peace-time
economy, there was insistence that the ideals of fiscal justice- confused
by the shrill chorus of the market place, even shaken by uncertain tones
from our own spokesmen-must determine the nation's revenue system.
In short, the economist has filed formal caveat against recourse to
the argument of assumed expediency and momentary opportunism in
defense of war policies which are theoretically vulnerable. He has
insisted that expediency is a subjective and relative term, which one
man regards as such and another will deny, and that as soon as we
leave the safe moorings of that which is scientifically sound-we are
adrift. He recalls that Secretary Chase doubtless deemed the greenback
unsound "in theory," but justified it as a practical expedient.
So too Mr. Bryan's silver proposals and a hundred dangerous ventures
with which we have from time to time been tempted. His position is,
in a word, that for an administrator to engage in a theoretically
unsound practice and to defend it on the score of practical necessity
reduces the matter to a rigid calculus, as to which-until the final outcome
-official opinion is worth as much, but only as much, as that
emanating from any other equally competent quarter.
IV

The economist's task is far from done; but it enters upon a new
phase. In the political economy of war, as of peace, time holds the
bank. Whatever the lapse, in the end truth comes into its own. Too
late to change the outcome, all the more is the true prophet acclaimed.
The clear errors, even the hard reactions of mistaken war and post-war
policies have begun to appear. Much more, perhaps, awaits. With
the disclosure must come-unless all signs fail-a wider interest in
economic study, a tremendous gain in the scientist's repute. The
prophet as seer may be without honor; but not the prophet as victor.
The market place, smarting in its hurt, is quick to magnify the virtue
of him whose neglected counsel, it comes to appear, might have softened,
perhaps warded off, the blow.

More than once, economic experience has developed the inconvenient