been made by economists of the time element in economics. I
hope to be able to show that one of the essential characteristics of
income is anticipated recurrence. I shall endeavor to exemplify by an
analysis of the time element in the concept of income a principle of
human conduct in matters economic which may prove to be of wide
and general significance and which, for lack of a better term, I have
ventured to call the law of recurrence. In view of the recent revival of
interest in what is sometimes called "pure theory" I need make no
apology for the somewhat metaphysical character of this law. It is
not more so than is many another law which we have accepted and
which we use daily and effectively in our work.
Professor Fetter has already pointed out that human wants are
recurrent and that income if it is to serve those wants must be recurrent.
' To this we may add that all the processes of production, together
with the costs or efforts expended upon them are also periodic
and recurrent.
It would be an exaggeration, not justifiable even for rhetorical purposes,
to say that economists have been unmindful of this law of recurrence
or of the significance of time. But I believe that something, and
it may be a rather large something, will be gained by focusing attention
still more than has already been done upon the element of time.
To guard at the start against a very probable misunderstanding it
may be well to explain that there are certain phases of time that I do
not propose to consider. I am not thinking of time in that sense in
which it was set up by Heraclitus of Ephesus as the basis of his philosophy.
To him time was suggestive merely of an eternal flux or
change. Nor do I refer to that progress in time or secular change
which is sometimes the thought behind the distinction so frequently
drawn between the static and the dynamic laws or conditions of economic
life. While time brings changes, and may mark the progress or
retrogression of civilization, what I conceive to be even more important
to the economist is that man orders his life very largely in anticipation
of that succession of events which he calls time. Thus fully aware that
he will grow hungry on recurrent occasions he strives to introduce a
similar recurrence into his provision of food. In the making of such
provision he is not merely anticipating the recurrence of appetite but
is controlled by the recurrence of the seasons, and by the all important
fact that any and every expenditure of force or of effort, whether on
the part of nature or of himself, requires time.
I have said that economists have already made important studies
based upon time. The whole theory (and justification) of interest
as it is ordinarily stated today is based on the distinction between
present and future goods or satisfactions. This explanation has been