such. They are themselves tools of analysis and methods of approach to a
picture too complicated ever to be finished. A third point is that while a
picture of perfect equilibrium deals in its way with forces which are at
work in the actual world, the form in which it presents these forces will
almost inevitably need to be modified when we move on to the task of
studying them as they actually operate. The terms of a static demand schedule
need to be changed in order to fashion it into a verifiable concept;
and the tendency of prices toward cost of production does not operate
unqualifiedly under all conditions. Some of these changes are likely to be
of the sort which John Stuart Mill described as chemical rather than mechanical,
leading to results not deducible by the method of composition of
forces. And a fourth point is that the problems with which these theories
of marginal equilibrium deal are not the whole of economics.
In the period when the economics of marginal equilibrium held the
field as the supreme orthodoxy, these qualifications tended to be forgotten
to a greater or less extent; and the result was really an injustice to the
theory. Too much was expected of it.
The Critical Movement
At no time was the marginal economics free from disagreement and
controversy; in fact, some of its family quarrels were famous. More serious
criticism began to come from Thorstein Veblen even before the publication
of my father's Distribution of Wealth; but for some time he made
little impression on those inside the citadel, save one of irritated puzzlement
as to what he was driving at and why. But for some years before the
outbreak of the World War there was an increasing spirit of scepticism
mixed with active iconoclasm, which before long came to seem the characteristic
mood.
There were attacks on the hedonistic psychology underlying marginal
utility, leading some to withdraw into psychological agnosticism. Some
managed miraculously to keep a semblance of the doctrine while attempting
to withdraw from all vulnerable psychological positions. There were attacks
on the ethical implications of marginal productivity, attacks on the logic of
marginal imputation and on the founding of the factors which underlay
it. There were attacks on statics for not being dynamics, or more pertinently
for not affording an adequate approach to dynamics. There were attacks
going no deeper than verbal questions of the formulation of theories, and
attacks apparently aiming to uproot all theory as such. In caliber, the attacks
ranged from mediocrity cavilling at what it did not understand to genius
declining to classify its intuitive insights in the customary pigeonholes.
It is obviously out of the question to estimate the validity of all this
body of criticism. Instead, I shall content myself with suggesting the way
in which it seems probable that this question will work itself out-namely,