included in the manufacturing and mechanical trades perceptibly
diminished from 1924 to 1930. The explanation of this decline is somewhat
complicated. It is possible, as has been suggested by some, that a
part of this diminution has been due to the growth of large corporations.
Unfortunately this hypothesis cannot be fully tested by the available
statistics, since the changing proportions of persons employed by the
so-called large corporations cannot be ascertained for the occupational
groups represented by the various trade unions. It seems probable,
however, that some of the decline is due to this factor. For example,
the Bakers have undoubtedly suffered in influence from the transfer of
the baking industry from small shops to large factories controlled by
the great corporations of the baking industry. It seems probable that
the metal trades unions have suffered from the same cause.
But any careful examination of the fortunes of the individual unions
in this group reveals another factor which far outweighs in importance
the extension of the great corporation. The rapid introduction of laborsaving
machinery accompanied as it almost always is by the replacement
of skilled labor with unskilled has lessened the membership of many
of the most important American trade unions. The only great group
of trade unions in the manufacturing industries which increased its
membership in the period under review was the printing trades section,
which has suffered relatively least from this factor. Consider briefly
the trade unions included in my compilations under the heading "Chemical,
Clay, Glass and Stone." The Flint Glass Workers in 1915 had
nearly 10,000 members, a membership which they retained until 1921;
at present they have less than half as many. The Glass Bottle Blowers
have suffered a similar decline. The Operative Potters have declined
from 8,000 in pre-war years to 5,800 in 1930. The various unions in the
Window Glass trade, once a powerful aggregation, have almost entirely
disappeared. The entire trade-union membership in the Chemical, Clay,
Glass and Stone trades is today far less than it was in 1915. No considerable
loss in this group can be attributed to the growth of large
corporations. In practically all of these trades the loss is traceable
directly to the invasion of labor-saving and skill-destroying machinery.
Very few unions in the manufacturing trades have escaped some loss
from this cause. The Cigar Makers report a membership in 1930 of
15,000; in 1924, they had nearly 30,000; and in 1915, 40,000. The
Molders, who in 1924 had 34,000, now report 20,000. In all of the unions
enumerated labor-saving machinery has been introduced.
The American trade unions with few exceptions have been built on
the skilled craftsman. Where skill survives, as in the printing trades,
unionism maintains its traditional influence. In the semi-industrial unions
-such as those in the clothing trades-the introduction of machinery