government of the day is stroking his fur or barking at him. They point
out that the annual volume of new investment was even smaller in 1931
and 1932 than in any year since 1933, although if in these earlier years
political shadows were being cast on the security of investment they could
not have been more than mere foreshadowings of prospective shadows.
They cite also the substantial recovery of the new investment level in 1936-
37, when capital was still insisting that it was scared. They have even
produced a statistical proof that "confidence" has nothing to do with the
volume of investment, which takes the form of a demonstration that the
rate of investment is so highly correlated with the rate of retail sales or
of consumers' spending that no other factor need be invoked to explain
its major fluctuations.
To my perhaps naive mind, the dogma still carries some shreds of
credibility, despite those weighty inductive refutations. As I understand
it, the dogma is not that the degree of confidence in the intentions of
government with respect to invested capital alone governs the rate of investment,
but merely that some minimum degree of such confidence is a
necessary condition of the continuance of investment at a high level. The
correspondence of the rate of investment with the rate of retail sales seems
at least as available to support the thesis that the rate of investment determines
the level of national income, to which thesis even the most timid
capitalist will happily subscribe, as to support the argument that the rate
of spending of income governs the rate of investment. But the only prachas
any designs on capital, it would be wiser to bite before and bark aftertical
lesson I care to draw from the possible validity of this dogma of the
timidity of capital in the face of political threats is that, if government
wards, if bark it must.
I hope-but do not expect-that I shall not be misunderstood as holding
that full and invariably appropriate guidance for government policy under
present-day conditions can be found in the old dogmas or in what could
until recently be called "accepted" economic doctrine. I know no economist
who would take this position, and if one were to be found I should agree
that he was trying to make a fool's paradise out of his private ivory tower.
My claim is much more moderate and, I hope, much more sensible. What
I contend is that for various reasons, but chiefly as a psychological reaction
to the impact of continued and acute depression, some economists
have been discarding too indiscriminately their inherited intellectual ballast,
with the result that they sway too easily with each passing wind. With
apologies to you for the form in which I state my claim, I contend merely
that there is life in the old dogmas yet. I concede that new light is needed
and all that I ask is that our minds be kept open to acceptance, strictly and
only on their merits, of both the old lights and the new.
Nor do I ask for a sympathetic hearing for the old dogmas in the belief