Take, for example, a demand schedule. Will a given change in the price
of electric refrigerators, relative to other things, have different effects in
a day, a month, a year, five years? Would other commodities show substantially
the full effect more quickly or more slowly? Can this time
element be represented by a curve approaching a saturation-point in time,
or by some other type of curve? Will sales at a price of $100 be different
one week after a reduction from $120 from what they would be one week
after an increase from $80? This problem seems especially pertinent to
the concept of the demand schedule for the output of a single productive
enterprise, of which so much use is now being made in the theory of imperfect
competition.
The list of problems is endless; but these examples may suffice. It is
clear that there is no lack of tasks for economists, and tasks which have
important bearings on policy, aside from catch-as-catch-can wrestling with
the expediencies of particular proposed measures.
Conclusion
It is not certain how much time the world will give us for finding answers
to questions such as these; indeed, it is not certain that free scientific
inquiry itself has a perpetual undisturbed lease on life. These also are
chances we must take. It may not be wise to embark on inquiries which
presuppose that the present system will remain substantially unchanged for
generations to come. But it is still less wise to be stampeded by the critical
state of the world into abandonment of all systematic inquiry; of all definitely
scientific researches which do not bear on the instant solution of the
question of a processing tax or a coal-control bill. And back of these researches
lies the thing which makes them possible: free scientific inquiry.
This, rather than particular conclusions and doctrines, is the most precious
heritage left us by our honored predecessors. It still has its place in the
world, so long as the world will tolerate it; and of all our possessions as
economists, this is the one best worth conserving, and defending if the
need should arise, with every effort in our power.
J. M. CLARK
Columbia University