The theorist's analysis is ordinarily couched in descriptive as distinguished
from normative terms. If choices as between social values influence
his thought, these choices are largely left implicit in his selection
of premises, and are rarely, and then usually apologetically, expressly
avowed. The policy-maker, however, is rarely satisfied with purely descriptive
analysis. He insists that he be advised not only what will be the objective
consequences of a specific line of action, but whether or not these
are desirable consequences. While he has always some notions of his own
with respect to the values which policy should serve, in my experience he
always demands of his economists that they guide him also in the determination
of what is socially desirable, and he expects the economist to acknowledge
and to display some professional competence in giving such
guidance.

There are always a number of different values to be considered, moreover,
and satisfaction of one often involves disregard of the other. This
makes necessary a sort of weighing process, in which the decision is presumably
made partly on the strength of quantitative information as to the
number of persons affected by alternative courses of action, their economic
status and needs, and so forth, and partly on the basis of a qualitative
ranking of values in terms of some sort of scale of worth. The theorist
as such here also lacks experience. He is hampered, moreover, by his
tendency to dissect the mental processes by which decision is reached in
such matters, and he tends to feel and to give discomfort by his reluctance
to express in definite and assured terms the conclusions which he knows
he has reached only by vague and imperfectly communicable processes of
thought.

The effect of the action on the subject is all that the theorist has been
trained or conditioned to think about with respect to public policy. The
official and the legislator, on the other hand, should, and in any case invariably
do, think also of the effect of the action on the actor. The economist
conditioned to the purity of abstract thought is liable to be unreasonable
in his refusal to recognize that the official, in choosing his time for action
and his manner and degree of action, must give regard to their impact
on his relations with superiors, colleagues, Congress, and the public, and
to their effect on the prestige of his agency and the morale of his staff.
But the official must operate in this way if those with whom he has to deal
from day to day are to give him that cooperation and good will which are
essential not merely for his own personal success and comfort but for the
satisfactory execution of his functions.

The hbiher officials in Washington, whether they be political appointees
or career men, in my opinion, need make no apologies for their standards
even to college professors, elect of the elect though we be. As far as I have
observed, the higher officials in Washington as a group work as hard,