Classical and neo-classical economic theory is commonly associated
with a form of liberalism that was more largely directed toward the
repeal of old laws and regulations than to the constructive development
of institutions to meet new social problems. In the past the chief emphasis
has been laid upon these destructive accomplishments of economic
liberalism. It has therefore been easy to overlook the actual constructive
accomplishments of the early nineteenth century, and many are disposed
to believe that these positive achievements were inconsistent with
the primary postulates of classical and neo-classical theory. It must
be confessed that there is confusion of thought in the writings of the
early nineteenth century economists; but a positive theory of constructive
statecraft is implicit in the basic liberal concepts. The most characteristic
features of classical theory lead directly toward a broad concept
of the task of the state.
Classical theory was based upon the concept of an orderly and rational
system of nature, and the concept of a contractual society. We
need not concern ourselves here with the precise forms in which these
concepts were held by the economists of the nineteenth century, because
it is more important to direct our attention to the full content of these
ideas than to the imperfect and incomplete formulations that have prevented
liberal views from achieving their full development.
The science and philosophy of the nineteenth century has greatly
enlarged the scope of both of these fundamental concepts. The philosophy
of nature has been profoundly changed by the development of the
chemical and biological sciences and by the new achievements of astronomy.
Bare mechanical categories of cause and effect have been supplemented
by concepts of adaptation, and of reciprocal determination.
Concepts of absolute laws of nature have been softened so that we now
recognize that the scope of any particular generalization is conditioned
by its place in some system of relations. We recognize, too, that no single
system of relations exhausts all possible interests or interpretations.
In like fashion our attitude toward social and economic institutions
has been profoundly transformed since the publication of the Wealth