covered upon payment of certain dues to the government. In Cornwall,
and in the lead mining area of the Mendip hills, surface owners had
no exclusive rights to undiscovered minerals nor any right to prevent
the search for minerals. Rights to the precious metals in England vested
in the crown, and at a critical period in the sixteenth century coal
barely escaped inclusion within the category of mines royal. The precise
limits of rights of property are not very specifically defined. Limits
vary in different jurisdictions and at various times. The redefinition of
these limits constitutes one of the most interesting and significant aspects
in the evolu-tion of our modern contractual society. Recognition of the
fact of social development necessarily commits the liberal to continuous
redefinition of the rights of property. This important feature of public
policy was clearly perceived by John Stuart Mill when he said "the
institution of private property can be improved."
The uncertain future of the gold standard and the current discussion
of various forms of managed currencies raise issues which carry
us more specifically beyond classical theory. The automatic gold standard
was intimately bound into the early liberal concept of a self-regulated
society in which government control and interference were casual and
exceptional. The modern analysis of credit would seem to involve a
serious break with characteristic liberal concepts. It certainly involves
a complete abandonment of a concept of social adjustment produced
by individual acts and choices in which the specific personal interest
is the sole basis of the judgment or choice. Each individual by following
his own interests was presumed to promote the achievement of a
general social welfare that was never consciously considered by anyone,
whether individual or government official. This view was vividly
expressed in respect of banking policy. The function of the bank was
reduced to the task of supplying the credit demanded by the trader;
and, though it was recognized that only "legitimate" demands must
be granted, this qualification meant merely that only bona fide commercial
paper based on actual goods might safely be discounted. The
banker was thus merely the passive servant of the trader. Under these
circumstances, the government need merely insist upon the maintenance
of the convertibility of credit into gold, by preventing imprudent issue
of notes or imprudent neglect of reserves.
None of the outstanding modern analyses of credit accept such a passive
concept of banking policy. It is pretty generally recognized that
banking involves not only serving the trader but in a measure directing
the general course of his activities. Management of the currency is an
inescapable necessity. The present problem is to discover the true objectives
of currency management, and to discover appropriate means of
credit control.
The enlarged concepts of the system of nature bring new elements