required for the production of cloth is employed on the plantation,
where the increase of productive power has been comparatively
slight. We compare the cost of moving a ton of freight by railway
and by wagon, but we forget that owing to the growth and
expansion of population and to its congestion in limited areas,
devoted to manlufactures and trade, goods must be carried much
longer distances than a century ago. We forget that the increase
in productive power lhas not been uniform throughout the
whole field of industry, that it has been greatest in manufactures,
mining, and transportation, and least in agriculture aiid the handling
of goods in trade, in which branches of industry is employed
a large part of the labor required in the production of the necessaries
of life. Furthermore, our industrial development, accompanied
as it has been by the growth of city life, has imposed upon
us the necessity of providing new forms of wealtlh and services
not required by a less densely settled population, such as paved
streets, sewage systems, costly plants for supplying water, police
service, and protection from fire, and has immensely increased the
difficulty of providing adequate housing.

The instances of increased power of production are striking and
appeal to the imagination. The offsets are not so obvious and are
apt to be overlooked.

Furthermore the great mass of the population which supplies
the manual labor factor in production has not benefited, and in
the nature of the case could not benefit, to the full extent of the
increase in per capita production which has taken. place. This
increase has been mainly due to invention, organization, and the
increase in the per capita equipinent of capital, none of which
would have been forthcoming in anything like the quantity actually
available except on condition of receiving a, share in the product.
Nlo matter what changes we may make in our industrial
organization, we must provide a return to these factors of production.
We may cut down their allowance but we cannot abolish
it except at the cost of industrial progress. That there has
been a substantial increase in real wages during the last hundred
years, with corresponding improvemen-i in the living conditions of
the mass of the population, there can be no question, although it
has probably been less, in this country at least, than would be indicated
by a comparison between money wages and average prices.
The major portion of the laborers' expenises are for food and rent.
Rent is not included in the general price average and has undoubtedly