The program of the American Economic Association this year is an
experiment. Aside from the session this afternoon on Marxian economics,
the program is entirely concerned with problems of savings and investment.
The number of formal papers has been reduced to a minimum,
while the number of round-table meetings has been greatly increased. My
own part in the program is perhaps also in the nature of an experiment
since I am going to discuss a problem of immediate practical importance,
the problem of recovery in the United States. During the last four years,
our recovery from the depression has been less complete than in many
other countries, and now we seem to have taken the initiative in receding
from such recovery as has been made. This unsatisfactory experience demands
explanation, particularly in view of the presence of a variety of
influences of a favorable character. The United States has been comparatively
free from the hazard of war. Our domestic market is the largest
free-trade market in the world. Undoubtedly, also, a larger proportion
of the brains and energy of our people are devoted to business activities
than in other countries-at least than in the countries of western Europe.
Why, then, have we found it exceptionally difficult to restore and maintain
anything approaching full use of our available resources of land, labor
and capital?
Every great depression, as contrasted with minor cyclical recessions,
presents a situation in which considerable and difficult shifts in the employment
of labor and capital are required. This was the case in the
seventies of the last century, for example; and now we have been confronted
with the necessity of developing a situation in which there shall
be an increased output of those manufactured goods and services for which
there is an elastic demand-an increase sufficient to absorb all the unemployed
labor attached to industry and also to draw considerable numbers
from agriculture. Only then will the agricultural problem become readily
manageable. Subjected to this test, the recovery which we have made is
not impressive. Industries producing manufactured consumer goods have
indeed made a fair recovery; but that recovery has been supported in part