over the lay notions bodily. Some of them have, in fact, given them a
theoretical elaboration which for subtlety, refinement, and elegance need
make no apologies to the older economics, and which remains faithful
to older theorizing in at least one, respect, that the tradition of unintelligibility
to the layman is scrupulously observed. It is the quality of the judgment
displayed, and not the quality of the analytical skill, which I venture
to question. No matter how refined and how elaborate the analysis,
if it rests solely on the short view it will still be close to the layman's economics
and still be a structure built on shifting sands.

My aim this evening is not to praise the old-fashioned economic theorist,
but only to help protect him from premature burial. The strongest line of
defense I find available is the argument that he is the special custodian for
society of the long view in economic matters, and that even in troubled
periods that view is entitled not to undisputed dominance but to a full
hearing. Since its value with reference to any specific issue can be tested
only empirically and therefore only after a substantial period of time has
elapsed, I shall present my case for the long view forward by taking the
long view back into history with respect to several of the doctrines in
the orthodox tradition. Not to make it too easy for myself, I shall deal
only with doctrines that have been so conventionalized through time that
they seem to the short-viewers flagrant examples of the freezing of doctrine
into dogmas whose venerability is their only claim to virtue.
An underlying characteristic of the orthodox Anglo-American economics
during its entire period of dominance was its basically optimistic outlook
on the prospective trend of events. As a cursory inspection of the files of
presidential addresses before the American Economic Association and its
English prototype would confirm, the economists of the time believed that,
despite wars, mistakes in government policy, and cyclical disturbances,
private initiative, technological progress, and the improvement and wider
diffusion of education had resulted in and would continue to result in a
slowly rising secular trend of per capita income, enjoyed by steadily-growing
populations. Imbued with this moderately optimistic long view, the
economists listened neither to the occasional prophets of impending and
lasting woe nor to the more frequent peddlers of patented devices for
antedating the millennium. For the period up to 1914 at least, they proved
on the whole to have been right. In the flush days of the 1920's, however,
we were told: that what was then would continue to be, forever and ever;
that the problem of the cycle had been solved by the Federal Reserve Board;
and that we had entered upon a new era of perpetual boom. The great
bulk of the economic profession, taking the long view, refused to give
credence to this blissful picture. How right they proved we are unfortunately
only too well aware. The perpetual boom having come to its dramatic
end, it later subsequently became increasingly apparent that all the days