history, we shall have greatly lengthened, though on a narrow front,
our statistical base-line, now so short.

But, happy as are the economic historians over this opportunity for
the improvement of their one possible long statistical measure, they
realize fully how imperfect their best efforts must leave it. For the
causeway will be very narrow, and at places badly broken. Even with
the cautious piecing together of much more material than has hitherto
been available, serious gaps and deficiencies in the historical record must
inevitably remain.

Although always aware of the serious deficiencies in all the records
upon which he is dependent, the historian, by reason of the requirements
of continuous narrative, usually fails to convey to the reader
the full meaning of this imperfection. Absence or scarcity of records,
often at vital points and over considerable spaces of time, is the most
obvious and distressing of handicaps. But continuously baffling is the
qualitative inadequacy of the material, its inherent and shifting biases,
even when, as in the most recent centuries of history, the volume of
records increases enormously. The rise of modern states and of centralized
governments resulted in an immense increase of paper-work and
the gradual organization of state archives, where there are housed and
prepared for use great collections of political, administrative, and
judicial documents. The invention of the printing press brought a flood
of books and pamphlets; and, by its help in making men literate, brought
forth new stacks of writings, private in character, to bless and to harass
the historian. To curse with Carlyle this Dryasdust accumulation, or to
wish that the multitude of men had remained voiceless, is inadmissible.
Instead, the crushing task is divided and subdivided by shorter periods
and narrower topics; but the increasing division of labor has not lessened
the most crucial difficulties.

This very defectiveness of the raw material of his craft has largely
determined and limited the method and aim of the historian. Historical
technique, higher criticism, interpretation amounting to interpolation,
what are they in the main but methods and practices of filling gaps and
correcting biases? History has sometimes been severed from the other
social sciences by limiting it to the peculiar function of describing the
unique occurrence. Some go so far as to assert that this function forever
debars it from any attempt at the comparisons, classifications and
generalizations which characterize a science. May it not be truer to
say that the consciousness of defective material and the consequent
hypertrophy of critical talent has tended at times to check the human
craving for synthesis? The wary historian, taught and teaching the
dangers of historical analogies, has tried to limit his professional risks;
but he is increasingly minimizing those risks. In our modern historical