general, to get food enough to keep soul and body togetlier, and clotlhingr
tnd slhelter enouglh to iiect the mYlost urgcnt demands of decency.
Apparenitly even in the wealthiest country in the world the annual
product is not sufficient to providle nmore than a very moderate
surplus above whiat is required for the physical necessities of its
people as a wlhole.

According to King's estirnate there were in 1910 over nine million
families, excluding single individuals without dependents, with
incomes of less than $900, about one half of the total of such
families in the country. As already stated, the farmilies with incomes
in excess of $3,000 constitute(l not more than 4 per cent of
the total. From these families niust lhave come the major part of
the savings of the nation. If we lhald taken the whole surplus above
$3,000 froni these families, less their savings, and distributed it
among the poorest classes of the populationi, it might conceivably,
for the moment, haive es-tablished a minimum family income of
$1,000; but it is hardly necessary to argue that nio suclh radical
redistribution of income could be accomplished, eitlher througlh
taxation or an increase of wages at the expense of the other factors
of production without a falling off in production which would:
far exceed the sum distributed.

The production of a large portion of the income in excess of
$3,000 per family was undoubtedly due to the efficiency and savings
of those into whose hands it passed, Avas an essential factor
in stimulating their efficiency and savings, and could by no process
of reasoning be attributed to those among whom we have assume(
l it to be distributed.

I am, of course, aware tLat these figures do not apply today.
Not only have mioiney values doubled, but war lhas affected the
distribution of the national income probably to the advantage of
the well-to-do. Present condlitions are, however, abnormnal. The
war gave a treimen(lous stimulus to productive energy. We called
on h-itherto unused labor power an-d we worked overtime. Tr1here
is bound to be a reaction from. these concditions. It is still too
early to estimate wha-t the permanent eiect of the war will be,
but there can hardly be said to be as yet clear evidences of permanent
increase in per capita produiction.

I do not wislh to minimize the importance of the problem of distribution
or the evil of extrav.agant expeniditure. The smaller tlle
augregate inlcomile, the more im-1portant its equiL ble distribution
and the more reprehiensible extrava,iga,tnt and wastefuil expenditure.