to the dislocation of peace. With the change, philosophical depression
was succeeded by historical retrospect. The sensible form became
a revival of the age-old concept of cyclical return. Less naive than the
Stoic's doctrine of periodic destructions and rebirths, more complex
than Vico's principle of reflux, less mystic than Nietzsche's vision of
eternal recurrence-the essence of this new creed is that the course
of human affairs follows not a trajectory but a spiral.
The composite origin of the doctrine appears in its two phases: the
spiral may be horizontal or vertical. The one, with ear-mark of reaction,
assumes a recurrent swing bringing man back again and again
to the point from which he started; the other, still linked with the
old optimism, pictures a spiral ascent, wherein "each stage of an
upward progress corresponds in certain general aspects to a stage
which has already been traversed."4 Both are insistent that normal
forces working in essentially like settings beget similar phenomena.
Color and warmth have been lent to this "neo-spiralism" by historic
parallel. In particular, the accompaniments and sequels of the other
4"great war" of a hundred years ago disclose resemblances so startling
that a recent investigator observes: "A student conversant with the
earlier period often has an uncanny feeling of having previously lived
through current events."5 In currency disorders, in price fluctuations,
in industrial disputes, in agricultural unrest, in trade depression, in
social reaction-this likeness appears: "Everything goes, everything
returns, eternally does the wheel of being roll."6
The parallelism in economic facts has been at least partially explored;
but the likeness in economic thought has received little attention.
Invoking the principle of historical relativity, an exhibit of
resemblance might be expected. Opinion is an interpretation of life.
Given corresponding conditions, like doctrines may be anticipateddiffering
only as the personal equation shades the image or as new
instruments of precision render it more exact.
The role of the political economist in the Napoleonic contest and its
aftermath was not influential, certainly not distinguished. Adam
Smith's death three years before the outbreak of hostilities had made
"4less impression than the death of a bustling divine." The public regarded
the Theory of Moral Sentiments as "a far superior work" to
the Wealth of Nations, and calmly accepted the latter as "a sensible
book."7