world"? Later they might find it interesting to note that the great minds
of the past had an occasional inkling of the reality.
The economic and social world was cleft and shattered by the series
of events beginning in 1914. How confidently can the future historian turn
to the economic writings of the war and post-war periods for an illuminating
analysis of the actual development of economic forces and their social
political repercussions? The layman believes that the historian will find that
the writings of economists offer the least fruitful material for his purposes.
The layman thinks that the economist has been not very helpful in
clearing up the issues raised by the late depression. He thinks that the
economist has followed the time-honored precept: "If you haven't got
what the customer wants, throw a handful of statistics in his eyes."
Of course the layman is uninformed and unfair. It goes without saying
that he greatly under-estimates the actual contribution of the economists
to the interpretation of the problems of the day. In one point, however, the
layman appears to have justice on his side. The economist has not been
active enough, responsible enough, well enough organized, to bring forward
his findings on emergency situations before the moment for action has
gone by. The economist has refused to pass judgment on the basis of data
that are only ninety per cent adequate, although the practical affairs of
the world must necessarily be conducted on a much less adequate basis
than that. In spite of the fact that his material is always imperfect, he has
allowed himself to be controlled, in too great measure, by academic perfectionism.
In spite of his recognition of the fugitive character of authority in
the social sciences, he is unwilling to take a chance that might weaken his
authority.

Therefore politics, which must act when the crisis presses, acts for the
most part without benefit of the services of the economists. With due
credit to the economists who composed the original "brain trust," we must
still admit that the policies grouped together under the term "New Deal"
have been little influenced by the professional economist. The economists
were slow to realize the need for action, and were inclined to hold back and
let the politicians assume all the responsibility. We saw, in the making,
measures that responded to an immediate need, but were full of imperfections.
We saw other measures that should never have been adopted, but we
held our fire until after the enemy column had passed. This the lay public
resents.

But are we as scientists responsible for applying ourselves to the immediate
need? Is it not the glory of science that it holds aloof from the transient
emergency and discovers principles that have worked through long periods,
and will still be operating after the dust of the present occasion has cleared
away?

It is possible that the physical sciences may develop independently of