garded as so assured that they have a present value which can be computed
and for which the right to have them can be sold. Since this
characteristic is entirely absent from wages it cannot be one that distinguishes
income.
Common usage would include, in income, annuities and pensions.
Indeed they are sometimes considered the most desirable form of irncome.
They are spendable, recurrent receipts. They differ from
wages, in that they are not the result of present toil. They differ from
interest, rent, and dividends in that they are in a sense the reverse of
capitalizable. That is, the actuary tells us that each recurrent payment
is in part interest and in part "return of capital."
The man on the street would doubtless add to this list a fourth
group which he describes as gains and profits. This is certainly a
most difficult group. Because, in the first instance, gains and profits
are, whether regarded as two words or as a phrase, exceedingly difficult
to define, so as to suit everybody. We need not, however, penetrate
very deeply into the fog which surrounds them. We may, since
we have found three characteristics of income common to the other
three classes which we have already examined, reverse the original
procedure and inquire whether gains and profits have these three characteristics.
It will, I think, be readily admitted that those particular
gains and profits which are recurrent, expendable receipts are the ones
about whose income character there is seldom any doubt. Thus the
gains and profits of a merchant are his income. The possible or even
probable irregularity or uncertainty which distinguishes them from
some other incomes does not seem to militate against their inclusion in
income, provided they are expected to be recurrent. The same is true
of the gains and profits of dealers in capital assets, for the lands, stocks
and bonds, houses and the like are their stock in trade. Nor do the
gains and profits of a contractor, which may recur only at long intervals,
present any great difficulty. The gains and profits of a corporation
present difficulty primarily as to whether they shall be considered
the income of the company or of the stockholders. But it is when
gains and profits lack one or two of the three characteristics of income,
or have them in less than complete form, that a question arises. The
one that is most often lacking is recurrence. Thus gains and profits
from transactions outside of one's regular vocation or line of business,
like the profit from the sale of a home, are of doubtful income character.

Possibly the greatest difficulty here arises in connection with the
increment in the value of capital assets. For sometimes capital in and
of itself appears to grow. This is usually of no economic importance,
or, as Professor Fisher has so clearly shown, growth of capital has no
salable value, unless accompanied by a growth or increase of income