undeveloped resources. National prides and national animosities have
hindered but not prevented this exploitation. The need of undeveloped
or impoverished nations for revenues and the lack of sufficient capital
for the development of their own resources have induced industrially
backward nations to make bargains with and grant concessions to private
corporations for the purchase or lease of forest, mineral and other
lands within the boundaries of which the desired resources are supposed
to lie. Railways have been built, mining shafts sunk, oil wells driven and
plantations developed when necessary for the development of the resources
acquired, and even the native population has shared to some extent
in the prosperity brought by outside capital.
Economic conflict arises when other capitalistic enterprises, perhaps
under the control of othier nations, begin to develop similar resources
within the same country or perhaps in another part of the world and the
competing interests begin to place their products on the world market.
Then price wars follow which may be severe while they last, especially if
resources have been over-developed and not all the products can be
sold at profitable prices. In the old days of the chartered trading companies,
the conflict would have taken on a military aspect, for the charters
of the different companies would have authorized them to raise
armies, build fleets and to wage war, as did the British, Dutch and French
East India companies when they struggled to gain control of the accumulated
wealth of the Indies. But in the present era the industrial
and trading corporations do not possess the authority or the resources
to wage war. They are now accustomed to look to the governments of
their own countries to protect their interests. However, it is just this
combination of private and political agencies for the purpose of acquiring
or retaining control of natural resources and markets in regions
where foreign capital is engaged in the exploitation of such resources
which presents the greatest possibilities of war. The diplomatic efforts
of our own government to prevent other than American capitalists from
participation in the work of developing the natural resources of countries
in the Caribbean area have been especially disturbing in their effects on
the creation of a feeling of international good will and have made our
professions of a desire to see the open-door policy maintained elsewhere
seem insincere. It is a fair question whether a hands-off policy on the
part of governments which are sincere in their claims that they are not
pursuing imperialistic policies, and a limitation of their interference
to a dignified but strongly-worded protest against unwarranted attacks
mnade on their nationals who have invested their capital abroad would
not in the end create a better international feeling and afford more
protection to capital than do naval demonstrations or the threats of
military interference.