kept for our own manufacturers. American manufacturers have also
been inclined to think that their facilities for mass production and perhaps
unusual talents for conducting large-scale industrial operations
will give them an advantage in markets outside this country if they
can only secure their raw materials without obstacles being placed in
their way. However, it is well to remember that the recent activities
of the Dutch Shell Oil interests and of the Swedish Match Trust do not
lend credence to the notion that the United States has a monopoly of
business leadership.

International action of some sort would seem to be called for to bring
about a fair distribution of fuels, foodstuffs, power and raw materials;
and it is to the growth of power in the League of Nations or in some
other centralized authority in international affairs that we must hopefully
look for the future exercise of such authoritative control of distribution.
At present the League lacks the delegated authority and also
the means to make its findings effective and its decisions binding on its
own members, to say nothing of those nations outside the League whose
support is certainly necessary for any effective international control of
natural resources. As long as this situation continues, it seems obvious
that little more can be done by the League than to collect and make
public, statistical and other information as to the location and approximate
extent of these natural resources, how they are being utilized by
the nations which hold possession, and what obstacles, if any, exist, to
their full development and fair distribution. Something more can be
accomplished through the formulation by world economic conferences of
the principles which, in the minds of the delegates, should govern the
actions of the various nations when they are faced with this problem
of the control and distribution of raw materials. Such principles having
been formulated and adopted, the League can then urge their ratification
by its members in the hope that other than League members will
see the justice and wisdom of following the same policy.
Important as is this work of creating standards of conduct among
the nations, the process of education, by which the adoption of a universal
code of ethics is assured in matters in which national self-interests
seem so diverse from the ideals which a consideration of international
welfare would establish, is bound to be a slow one. If this is all that we
can depend upon to prevent wars arising from economic causes, we may
well despair of the attainment of international peace until the arrival
of the millenium. We have not had to wait, however, for the growth of
a world-power, which shall give force to international agreements covering
the exploitation of the natural resources when industrial progress
makes necessary their development. Capitalistic enterprises have made
their own bargains with the governments within whose dominions lie these