For those of us, therefore, who, convinced that democracy must
come, are glad to welcome it-who are not socialists, who instead regard
with favor the going institutions of working compromise between
the extremes of systematic anarchism and systematic collectivism, who
look ahead in limitless foreboding to the hazards and horrors of any
cataclysmic change, who have scant faith in the promise of any better
order into which these changes could finally lead-it is for us to ask
ourselves the terms on which the political democracy that is to come
can be harmonized with the competitive economic order. And thus,
once again, we return to examine what, in its economic aspect, the war
has meant, the problems which it has imposed, the solutions that it has
left possible. For we believe in political democracy as also we believe
in economic democracy, in the sense, be it repeated, that we hold neither
to be in essentials enduringly possible excepting in the presence of the
other.
It is now to be emphasized that the world war has not left the world
impoverished, for the sole reason that it could not. Wars are supported
out of current social product simply because they have to be.
It is present dearth as it is present death that war imposes. The poverty
of public debts is a fallacy, excepting in the purely separatist
sense that a national debt may be held by foreign creditors-the consumption
of the warring country supported out of the current supplies
of the creditor country. But just as in a national inventory of wealth
all domestic relations of debt and credit cancel out, so in a world accounting
all international debts must disappear.
In the main, these war debts are domestically held. And such part
of them as are held outside the country of their issue are held in the
allied countries. The present tragedy of want in Europe reports, for
the most part, not the impoverishment of resources by the war nor the
national indebtedness remaining over from it but only a paralysis of
current industry-a war legacy of disorder and disorganization, or
the dire gift of post-war diplomacy-new imperialisms, and continued
wars. It is not chiefly by the depletion of capital funds but by the
interruption of income flow that Europe lacks for supplies, precisely
as in the war years it was not out of capital resources but out of current
production that the war was supported.
No? But it has become as commonplace as self-evident that no
future item of product can function as supply for either the civilian
or the military needs of any warring country. Neither war loans, nor
war taxes, nor any other loan or tax, can make possible the present
consumption of a prospective product. Old Sir Thomas Browne saw
this truth clearly: "He had caught a great cold had he no other clothes