ters mentioned "are not adequately determined by the market processhours
of work and conditions of work are things that intimately concern
workmen and are best decided collectively."5

Returning now to a discussion of wages and collective bargaining, it is to
be noted that according to the economic theory briefly stated above, there is
a tendency for wages to equal the value-product of labor at the margin.
Economists generally do not contend, however, that this tendency fully safeguards
the wage-interest of the workers. They recognize the element of friction
in the real situation. Some attach much more importance to friction
than do others. In my opinion, and I think in the opinion of most able and
experienced employers also, it is of greater importance than is generally
recognized by our fraternity. Put in other words, the demand for labor is
not as effective in safeguarding the workers' interest in wages as most
economic theorists seem to think, if not to contend.
In a boom period, when prices are rising and profits are good, business
is very active and bidding for labor generally becomes keen. It may develop
to the point of stealing help. At such times rates of pay advance rapidly.
But in more normal times, though progress is being made and most
workers are finding employment, wage advances are hesitantly offered, and
there is more or less room for under-payment, even for a considerable degree
of exploitation. For there are groups with limited mobility, and new
accessions to the labor supply and displaced workers are more or less
eagerly seeking employment on such terms as their limited individual
bargaining ability will secure for them. It may then well be that there are
no well-defined standards of wages in certain industries and in many localities.
For long periods labor tends to be absorbed into the industry or locality
with limited relation to wages paid elsewhere. Within one industry or
locality there are the lower obstructive wages paid by the hard-boiled managers.
Piece-rates are nibbled here and there, more work or better quality
is required, and the worker is stretched out. All the while in most plants
there is a bad rate structure, slowly corrected, when corrected at all. The
fact is that wages depend to a considerable extent upon the policies of the
employers, as so many investigators have found in concrete situations. To
secure evidence, study, among others, the needle trades, the bituminous
coal industry, the cleaning and dyeing industry, the laundry trade, the manufacture
of candy, and the cotton textile industry.

Furthermore, the economic theorist assumes in much or in all of his
analysis that there is no element of monopoly or concerted control in the
demand for labor or in fixing wages. This is by no means true. An employer,
or a group of employers acting in concert or just individually fearing
to create problems, may dominate the employment situation in a community.
So it was in the mining of anthracite coal between the middle
f W. H. Hutt, The Theory of Collective Bargaining, p. 107.