and collective bargaining won tllrough long years of
struggle, but they inust be educated to realize that only through
cooperation with the employer in tbe increase of production can
laborers as a body acquire their maximumn earning power, that
any advantage obtained by a special group in the form of higher
wages accompanied by decreased per capita production and the
spreading out of work is obtained at the expense of the rest of the
community and is negatived by like succe-ss on the part of other
groups.

Employers cannot be expected to give up their responsibility for
management and the protection of the property interests which
they control, but they must be educated to realize the lesson emphasized
by the war, that there is really no such thing as private
industry, that, in the last analysis, they represent the nation and
that tlleir tenure depends upon their ability to organize effectively
the nation's productive resources and maintain harmonious relations
between those who must co6perate in industry. Success in
this task and not profits, except as they measure such success, is
the true measure of their efficiency. It would be foolish to begrudge
large rewards to those who succeed, but the task must be
performed or iother forms of industrial organization will be tried.
Until we can develop an intelligent public opinion on these fundamental
questions there is little hope of harmony in our industrial
life.

The alternative is a continuation of the struggle for control
which contains little iof promise. If we have erred in the past in
offering the laborer nothing but wages and giving him no voice
or responsibility in the organization and operation of the industry
in which he is engaged, there seems to be no reason to believe that
we should fare better if we put labor in absolute control, placing
capital and organizing and managing ability on a fixed stipend,
but denying them an effective voice in management and control.
I doubt whether human nature differs essentially as between economic
classes, whether we can expect better results from the dominance
of one class than of another, and whether we can eliminate
industrial conflict by eliminating the voice and the responsibility
of the capitalist and the entrepreneur in industry. The conflict
between classes would be replaced by struggle between different
groups of laborers. This struggle is suppressed while thle laborers
combine to fight the employer, but there is plenty of evidence
that it exists.
