is the capitalistic or class state, itself only ani historical incident,
marking a certain stage in the development of economic and political
institutions. The abiding thing is the conflict of the interests of
different economic classes. Mlodern wars are undertaken to secure
the advantage, not of a niation, but of a class. The real lines of
cleavage are to be found, not at national frontiers, but in the horizontal
stratification of society.
One element in this Marxian doctrine, nanmely the notion of surplus
products pressing outward across national boundaries under military
convoy, has an especially wide vogue. Writers who do not count
themselves followers of Marx, as well as those who do, employ it as a
routine formula.
The second general class or type of opinions to which I have referred
is distinguished, not by a special emphasis upon some particular
view of the nature and purposes of the aggressive activities of states,
but by a very definite thesis with respect to the wisdom and the consequences
of such activities. If wars are waged for economic advantage,
it is held, they defeat their own purposes. So too, in general, with all
national policies designed to advance the economic interests of one
state at the expense of other states. The truth is, it is alleged, that
a nation gains by the prosperity of other nations, not by their poverty.
This general thesis, if stated with some necessary qualifications,
would be subscribed to, I think, by most economists. It was brilliantly
expounded in Mr. Norman Angell's book, The Great Illusion. If, in
the days of its first vogue, that book seemed to be given little attention
by the economists, it was not, I imagine, because they disagreed with its
conclusions, but rather because most of those conclusions seemed to
them to be fairly commonplace economic doctrines. Doubtless Mr.
Angell weakened a good case by pushing it a little too far. He gave
too little weight to the special interests (not necessarily or even
generally class interests) that may be served by a belligerent or
imperialistic policy, even when other interests, larger but more diffused,
are injured. He did not adequately distinguish between immediate
and ultimate gains and losses. But taking his argument in the large,
and leaving details aside, it would command, I believe, the general
assent of economists. Some of the policies he finds unwise are, in fact,
policies we are accustomed to disparage by lumping them together and
calling them neo-mercantilism.
Assuming that Mr. Angell and the economists are right, is there
ground for hope that, as the result of a slow process of education, the
world would become convinced that aggressive economic nationalism
is profitless? Is there reason to believe that in this event the so-called
economic causes of war would be done away with? Such hopes, we