no more than our political system. The political structure of the
western world lhas undergone radical changes during the last hundred
years and it is clear that democracy carries with it the possibility
of radical changes in industrial structure, brought about
through legal procedure. We are equally blind if we fail to see
that the hundred years which have placed political power in the
hands of the masses of the population have also changed in their
favor the balance of industrial power. These changes clearly foreshadow
chaniges in the structure of our industrial system. The
question is as to the lines which such changes must follow if they
are to be constructive ratlher than destructive and accomplish their
purpose of improving the economic condition of the masses of the
people.

Time is lacking, even had I the ability, to outline in detail the
course wlhiclh we should follow in our industrial readjustments.
M\y purpose is sinmply to call attention to certain facts wlhicl
must be recognized if we are to realize the true nature of our
problenm andcl thus avoid the mistakes and disappointmnent whicl
will follow at!liepts to solve it by methods foredoomed to failure.
There lhas been a general inclination, evident even in the case
of some economiists an(d sociologists, to assume that the problemn of
the production of wealth lhas been solved by the introduction of
power maclhinery and that the only problem wlhiclh remains is the
problem of distribution. This is due I believe to an exaggerated
estimate of the increase of productive power based on a superficial
examination of the facts and to a failure to recognize that
the enormous inicrease in aggregate productive power, which has
undoubtedly taken place, hcas to a considerable extent been absorbed
in the suipport of a popuilation increaising far more rapidly
than at any othler period of the world's history, far more rapidly
in fact than under any coniceivable condition it can continue to
increase.

The tendency to overestimate the increase in per capita productive
power during the last hundred and fifty years results from concentratinog
our attention on the more obvious and overlooking the
less obvious facets in the changes which lhave taken place.
We compare the quantity of cloth turned out in a modern cotton
mill witlh the quiantity wlich could be turned out by the same
numilber of laborers using the spinning wheel and the hand loom,
forgetting the labor whichl has gonle into the construction of the
mill and its equipmenlt and the fact that a large part of the labor