Once upon a time an academic economic theorist, by some freak of fate
not likely to be often repeated, got himself slightly entangled in the machinery
of formulation of government economic policy. What I plan to tell you
tonight reflects largely, though not I hope too explicitly, what the process
of policy-formulation did to his academic theorizing, and what his theorizing
failed to do to the process of policy-formulation.
As an active participant in the policy-making process, the academic
theorist suffers from a number of handicaps more or less peculiar to himself.
For purposes of teaching, or of acceptable writing for his restricted
audience of fellow-theorists, his conclusions are of little importance; and
what matters above all is the rigor and elegance of his manner of reaching
them. For policy, on the other hand, conclusions are vital, and often are
all that is vital. For the purposes of academic theorizing, the premises
the theorist starts from may without serious penalty be arbitrarily selected,
narrowly restricted in range, and purely hypothetical in nature. But the
selection of premises controls the conclusions reached, and for policydetermination
it is therefore vital that all the important variables be
covered by the analysis, and that the conclusions be not affected by the use
of premises which are irrevelant for their purposes or less realistic than
it is possible with the aid of available information to make them. To violate
these rules in policy-making is to be guilty of the grossest irresponsibility.
If he is not to be wholly in the way of the policy-maker, therefore,
the theorist must emerge from his ivory tower,-which is almost as hard
as to return to it.
The theorist's habitual methods of analysis are such as to lead to "right"
or "wrong" answers to manufactured problems, the premises and the
criteria of rightness being so chosen as to make this not only possible but
necessary. For the policy-maker, however, the problems are for the most
part not of his own devising, but are presented to him by outside forces,
in vague and ill-defined fashion, and what he asks of his advisers consists
as much of help in determining what the problems are as of help
in finding solutions for them. The theorist here is likely to find himself
uninformed and unskilled.