greatly increased for city laborers, while food lhas risen
relatively to the average.

In certain directions even the lower paid portions of the manual
laboring class have made great gains. Their freedom of movement
and comiiiunication have been immensely increased. They
can acquire the foundations of an education. Through the unification
of the industrial system of the world they have escaped the
danger of recurring periods of extreme hardship due to local
scarcity. They are offered a much larger varie-ty of goods from
which to choose and enjoy certain comforts and luxuries unknown
a century and a half ago. But the iincrease in their productive
power measured in the goods essential to life has been comparatively
small.

The rapid expansion of the industry of the world has been
made possible by an apparently inexhaustible supply of low paid
labor, constantly keeping pace with the demyiand, with the result
that a large par-t of the population of even the wealthiest countries
is living close to the margin of existence. Owing to their
number and the lack of individual efficiency their marginal productivity
has been low.

So far as this low marginal productivity is attributable to excessive
numbers, conditions haive been temporarily, at least, altered
by the war. There are probably ten mnillion fewer laborers in the
western industrial world today than there would have been if
there had been no war. This condition, particularly if it is accompanied
by an increase in individual efficiency, a rapid accumulation
of capital, and a stimulus to invention, offers the possibility
of the creation of a new standard of life sufficiently strong
to control the birth rate and a consequent permanent increase in
the marginal productivity and earning power of manual laborers.
As yet, however, this is only a possibility.

Apparently before the recent fall in the value of money only
about 4 per cent of the families in this country received an income
in excess of $3,000 and seven tenths of one per cent an income
in excess of $10,000.

The success of this small minority and the very large incomes
received by a very few have raised the standard of what is regarded
as a decent and healthful condition of life, have emplhasized
inequality and bred unrest and discontent. More tlhan this,
it has set standards of extravagant expendituire all too readily,
even if naturally, imitated by the manual laborer whenever his