created by the progress of technology. To be sure, the progress of technology
itself played in the nineteenth century a decisive role in the opening of new
territory and as a stimulus to population growth. But while technology can
facilitate the opening of new territory, it cannot create a new world or make
the old one bigger than it is. And while the advance of science, by reducing
the death rate, was a major cause of the vast nineteenth-century increase in
population, no important further gains in this direction can possibly offset
the prevailing low birth rate. Thus the further progress of science can
operate to open investment outlets only through its direct influence on the
technique of production.

We are thus rapidly entering a world in which we must fall back upon a
more rapid advance of technology than in the past if we are to find private investment
opportunities adequate to maintain full employment. Should we
accept the advice of those who would declare a moratorium on invention and
technical progress, this one remaining avenue for private investment would
also be closed. There can be no greater error in the analysis of the economic
trends of our times than that which finds in the advance of technology,
broadly conceived, a major cause of unemployment. It is true that we cannot
discount the problem of technological unemployment, a problem which may
be intensified by the apparently growing importance of capital-saving inventions.
But, on the other side, we cannot afford to neglect that type of
innovation which creates new industries and which thereby opens new outlets
for real investment. The problem of our generation is, above all, the
problem of inadequate private investment outlets. What we need is not a
slowing down in the progress of science and technology, but rather an
acceleration of that rate.

Of first-rate importance is the development of new industries. There is
certainly no basis for the assumption that these are a thing of the past. But
there is equally no basis for the assumption that we can take for granted
the rapid emergence of new industries as rich in investment opportunities
as the railroad, or more recently the automobile, together with all the related
developments, including the construction of public roads, to which it gave
rise. Nor is there any basis, either in history or in theory, for the assumption
that the rise of new industries proceeds inevitably at a uniform pace. The
growth of modern industry has not come in terms of millions of small
increments of change giving rise to a smooth and even development. Characteristically
it has come by gigantic leaps and bounds. Very often the change
can best be described as discontinuous, lumpy, and jerky, as indeed D. H.
Robertson has so vividly done. And when a revolutionary new industry like
the railroad or the automobile, after having initiated in its youth a powerful
upward surge of investment activity, reaches maturity and ceases to grow,
as all industries finally must, the whole economy must experience a profound
stagnation, unless indeed new developments take its place. It is not