been immeasurably widened; remote stars have been descried, measured,
weighed, and analyzed. The earth has shrunk in size and importance
as it has been assigned a relatively inconspicuous place in a greater
cosmos. New elements have been discovered, and the forces of nature
have been captured and harnessed to man's uses. But we remain still
on the threshold of the universe.
A generation or two ago the physicist was one of the most cocksure
of our scientific colleagues; today he is the most humble. New vistas
of knowledge have been opened up to him, on the frontier of which
he now stands. He has learned to utilize the force of electricity, but remains
perplexed before the movements of the electrons in their courses
within the atom. In the field of metallurgy he has discovered, if not new
metals, at least new combinations that have given the lightness with
strength which make possible the ever-longer flights of airplanes, the
hardness that is necessary for an automobile crankshaft, and the brightness
which is found in the trimmings of even the cheapest era. And yet
in this very domain, which he had apparently exploited so thoroughly,
the metallurgist and engineer finds himself on the frontier of new scientific
knowledge. "What is cohesion?" asked Sir Oliver Lodge. "Why,
when I pick up one end of my walking stick, does the other end come
up too?" The honest physicist answers that he does not know. He may
talk about attraction among atoms, but that is merely giving a name
to the unknown. The essential nature of cohesion is still a matter of
speculation.
Our material civilization today is based primarily upon the utilization
of power, most of which is derived from the stores of coal and oil which
are rapidly being depleted if not exhausted. But at almost every stage
the processes of production and utilization are still woefully wasteful.
In the present state of the exploitation of petroleum about three-fourths
of the oil remains in the soil. The recovery of the balance is a standing
challenge to science. In the case of coal the amount recovered varies according
to conditions; in the bituminous mines of Illinois only about
half of the coal is brought to the surface. Even more wasteful is the
utilization of oil and coal for power or heating. In spite of the continuous
improvement of the steam engine, or its replacement by the turbine or
gas motor, the ominous fact still confronts us that the greater part of
the energy derived from the combustion of the coal and oil is wasted.
The science of getting the maximum out of a pound of coal is still in its
infancy. It is true that great improvements have been made since the
World War, but the tardiness of this advance should make us apologetic
rather than proud. Man has become acquainted with enormous natural
forces, but he has not as yet contrived control of them nor reached an
adequate notion of their wise use.