Although man has practised agriculture and lived on the fruits of
the earth for hundreds of thousands of years, we do not yet understand
in detail the process of the growth of chloroplast, that part of the plant
which transforms the energy of sunlight into the potential energy of
carbon compounds. And yet if chloroplast, the green pigment in plants,
should cease to function, all plant and animal life would soon end upon
the earth. The so-called virus diseases or mosaics of plants constitute
a baffling mystery which plant pathologists have for a generation tried
in vain to penetrate.
In 1898 Sir William Crookes predicted that, at the then rate of increase
of world population, before 1931 the nations would be faced with
a scarcity of wheat. And yet today we have a surplus. How can the
error of this eminent scientist be explained? He based his prediction
on the scarcity of nitrogen for fertilizer; but this need has been so successfully
met by the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen that there is now
danger of an overproduction of fixed nitrogen as well as of wheat. And
yet, in spite of this brilliant achievement, the age-old process by which
plant bacteria "fix" nitrogen in the soil is not known.
Almost coincidentally with the beginning of the westward movement
in America, economics began its career as a science. But its pioneering
days were soon over. As the great industrial and social changes introduced
by the Industrial Revolution became consolidated and crystallized,
so the theory which interpreted them became systematized and
fixed. Basing themselves upon insufficient economic history and unproven
psychological assumptions the classical economists made a premature
attempt to formulate generalizations and "laws," and claimed for their
science a finality which left no-or few-frontiers. And a science without
frontiers cannot advance far. But even from the beginning there
were bold spirits who pioneered in the domain of economic theory, the
while their compatriots pushed the physical frontier across the middle
west of the United States and essayed new experiments in practical activities
and in public policy.
The last advance has come within a decade and is led by those who,
under the influence of scientific method, insist that the science of economics
must be freed from ideas that cannot be tested and proved. They
saw moreover that technology was remaking the material wbrld, and
were dissatisfied with the aloofness and abstractions of prevailing economic
theory. This they urged should deal not merely with wealth, but
with human behavior; and, since the behavior of human beings varies in
response to the differing stimuli of changing environments, they declared
that the enormous changes in our economic and social environment must
be taken into account. The World War called many economists into
services in which they attempted to translate their theories into public