system, with its balance of forces in a stable and unchanging universe, was
a major element in the intellectual environment of the men who created
formal economics. It provided the concept of law as a ruling force, the
notion of a fixed order in Nature, and a variety of analogies suggestive of
ways in which the data of economics might be organized.
A particular conjuncture served to give this approach prestige, historical
timeliness and no small degree of validity. Just when the mechanistic pattern
was becoming the model of scientific perfection, the move for a free
market was given impetus from other quarters and on other grounds. Adam
Smith's protests against the fettering restrictions of mercantilism were
rooted in the needs of rising English industrialism. But it was precisely to
the economy of a free market that mechanical conceptions were relevant. In
the sovereign market, characterized by competitive individualism, free
contract and complete mobility of factors, and subject to no important
changes over time, the physical concepts of force, equilibrium, action and
reaction had their analogues. Orderliness was generated through the "nicely
adjusted mechanism of nature," without design or conscious control, precisely
as it seemed to be in the cosmos. It was, then, at a time when the
practical requirements of British industrialism, and the ideas of economic
liberalism were leading to the removal of market restrictions, that the
architecture of a science appropriate to the free market was suggested by
Newtonian mechanics. Out of this conjuncture came a dominant tradition
in our discipline.
The body of economic thought defining the play of forces in a free market,
and illuminating the extraordinary order-creating qualities of such a
market, is one of the great constructs of the human mind. It enabled men to
perceive, beneath the apparent chaos and bewildering complexity of observable
economic activities, the working of a vast cooperative scheme by which
the diverse needs of millions of individuals were satisfied. The analogy that
lay behind this construct was never perfect, it is true. There was never complete
concordance between the thought systems of classical economics and
the real world-a fact of which the framers of these systems were fully
aware. For the completely free market was never achieved; the world of economic
events was always marked by a diversity of frictions and retardations.
The equilibrium, in Edgeworth's phrase, was that of the surface of the sea,
a sluggish sea with viscous wave. The laws of formal theory represented
conditions at the limit, not those open to actual observation. Change over
time, too, lay outside the realm of a mechanistically conceived economics
with its static models, but if it could be believed that the institutional development
had found its terminus, that the framework would, in its essentials,
change no more, this was not a serious limitation.
Of course, mechanistic concepts have not prevailed in unsullied form, or
to the exclusion of other ideas. A literary and humanistic tradition has