membership is of the whole number of persons gainfully employed. In
1900, it was 3 per cent; in 1910, 5.6 per cent; in 1920, over 12 per cent;
and in 1930, 8 per cent.

We may briefly summarize the present situation as follows: American
trade unionism is slowly being limited in influence by changes which
destroy the basis on which it is erected. It is probable that changes
in the law have adversely affected unionism. Certainly the growth of
large corporations has done so. But no one who carefully follows the
fortunes of individual unions can doubt that over and above these influences,
the relative decline in the power of American trade unionism
is due to occupational changes and to technological revolutions.
It would be interesting to speculate on the possibility that American
trade unionism as a whole could organize on some other basis than that
on which it has organized itself from the beginning of its history. It
is possible that something like the Knights of Labor may emerge and
dominate American trade-union organization. Many writers have counseled
the leaders of the American trade-union movement to abandon their
present forms of organization and to move in the direction of industrial
trade unionism. There are no indications that anything of this kind
will happen in the near future. The changes-occupational and technological-
which checked the advance of trade unionism in the last decade
appear likely to continue in the same direction. It is hazardous to
prophesy, but I see no reason to believe that American trade unionism
will so revolutionize itself within a short period of time as to become
in the next decade a more potent social influence than it has been in the
past decade. This is by no means to say that trade unionism in the
United States is on its way to insignificance as a social factor.
If then we may take it as probable that trade unionism is likely to
be a declining influence in determining the conditions of labor in general,
it is pertinent to inquire briefly what effect this change is likely to
have upon the development of the conditions of labor in the United
States. During the last 50 years, economists, with a greater approach
to unanimity than is customary among us, have assigned to trade
unionism a highly beneficent role in the development of a sound economic
structure. It is true that there have been differences in emphasis upon
the different aspects of the work which a sound trade unionism is assumed
to do. In the main, however, these may be reduced to two lines of thought.
The first school, if I may so dignify the matter, has assumed that
the weakness of the laborer in bargaining puts him at a disadvantage
in dealing with his employer and that a fair wage emerges only between
parties of equal bargaining power. The trade union, it is argued, furnishes
the needed addition to the bargaining power of the laborer. This form
of apologia goes far back in the literature and is sanctioned by many
honored names.
