bond-credit method, the world faces a situation altogether new in its
seriousness.

It is, in strictness, no part of my problem to; appraise the weight
of the war costs that somehow we carried and somehow had to carry.
If, relatively to our carrying ability, these were so light that noninflation
methods of loan finance could have served, so also the alternative
taxes could have been light. Modern war, waged even in a nearby
field, requires for each soldier in the ranks two tributary civilian workers.
Our three and one half millions of men, allowing for their transport
requirements, called for eight or more millions of tributary producers.
The bread-winners of the country numbered approximately
forty millions, many of these, however, not socially productive. The
less than thirty remaining millions had to make good these withdrawals
of men and to supply the soldiers and tributary workers with their
quotas of goods of ordinary civilian requirement. I take five million
of combatants to have been the limit of our utmost possible contribution
to the war. As it was, our supplies ran continuously short of our
commitments-warships, freighters, transports, submarines, airplanes,
cannon, machine guns, small arms, ammunition, blankets. It was things
that were lacking for our war funds to buy.

Whoever holds then, as I do not, that our per capita product of
civilian goods for civilian consumption was maintained in the war years,
proclaims merely, and as I think exaggerates, the ineptitude of America'
s economic participation in the war. Even if, in the speeding-up
aspect, our war record was all that is claimed for it as offsetting the
enormous war absorptions of men and of products, the record would
remain still profoundly humiliating. We came perilously near to losing
the war. It is only in the degree of possible civilian economies
that, in the main, war is now and always has been possible. Both the
magnitude and the methods of modern warfare are solely explicable
through the increasing margins of product available, above civilian requirements,
for the things of war. In the progress of the industrial
arts, therefore, are the explanations for the surpassing size, the surpassing
expensiveness, and the surpassing horrors of modern war. So
far, then, as the wisdom and spirit of peace lag behind industrial
progress, the primitive man may easily have been the more fortunate
man-our tree of knowledge heavy with bitter fruit.
In some sense it is beside my point, also, to stress further the fact,
that those inflation methods have vastly swollen the monetary statement
of the national debts. But in this fact is the decisive argument
against deflation. The bond issues have mortgaged our monetary policies.
The governments of the world are near enough to fiscal insolvency