poor; or do higher wages come out of profits? In either event, and especially
in the second, what is the effect on business enterprise and the volume
of employment for union men?

The answers must be brief and rather inadequate. The all too common
assertion that higher wages resulting in higher costs are charged up to the
consumer is frequently wrong, at least in part. Often they come out of profit,
especially where only a part of the industry is organized. Where they do
come out of profit, industry at that point is handicapped and there is a tendency
for it to migrate and flourish elsewhere. Where higher prices curtail
consumption, as of good housing, or where higher costs come out of profits,
the volume of employment for union men is diminished. Moreover, relatively
high wages may cause unneeded labor to seek to enter or to remain in the
trade, so that the amount of time lost is increased. And where a union cannot
control the industry supplying a market, a struggle ensues and organization
is likely to be disrupted. It is important for unions, especially those not
functioning in a monopolistic or sheltered position, to stress efficiency and
to observe the rule of what the traffic will bear in respect of costs.
Turning to a question which greatly concerned English economists a
century ago, are not the gains of the organized workers inevitably at the
expense of the unorganized?

Analysis shows that the effect of the union higher wages upon the wages
of others is a mixed one. For contrary forces are set in action. In so far as
non-union men are admitted to organized plants, they commonly reap the
full benefit of any improvement secured by union effort. Moreover, the
workers in a non-union plant in an industry with an active unionism also
secure gains; for if their employers pay too low wages and maintain too long
hours, the path of the organizers is easy.

But, on the other hand, where the closed shop is maintained the non-union
workman is excluded, and under the preferential shop he is handicapped.
Or if the effect of unionism is to restrict an industry because of smaller
quantities sold at higher prices or because of curtailment of profits, again
workmen are excluded and forced in increased numbers into other trades.
This of course tends to depress their wages and to increase the differentials
between union and non-union wages.

In these days much is said and a lot assumed about changing the distribution
of income as between labor and other recipients through the extension
of unionism and collective bargaining. A difficult question is raised.
Time permits only a recording of certain views in summary fashion.
It is clear that by the enforcement of standards under collective bargaining
a degree of exploitation can be prevented at the expense of unearned
profit. It is clear, also, that a share can be exacted from monopoly profit,
though, in justice to all, monopoly profit should be taxed away when not
prevented. Pressure exercised by labor or by law can have the effect of