a decline in the national income we could not again afford to risk. The consequences
for the vitality and workability of the economic system are too
serious to contemplate. I suggest-the figures are only a rough approximation-
that we cannot afford to let our income fall materially below
$65,000,000,000, or say $60,000,000,000 as a minimum. A scale of net
income-creating governmental expenditures adequate to prevent a fall in
income below this level can, it seems to me, scarcely be questioned, and
would currently, I believe, command the support of most economists. As
the national income, however, approaches $70,000,000,000, I suggest that
the net income-creating governmental expenditures ought to be tapered
off. As we approach this income level, the economic situation becomes increasingly
explosive. Bottle-necks begin to appear. Costs rise. Labor aggressively
demands wage increases. Rising costs lead to inventory speculation.
We encounter the familiar vicious spiral of rising costs and rising prices with
growing inefficiency. At this level the spending program becomes relatively
ineffective as a means to raise the real income of the community. This danger
point is clearly reached sooner in a democratic country than in a totalitarian
state. At what precise point it is reached depends upon the degree of discipline
and self-restraint which the various economic groups have achieved
or can achieve under democratic institutions. What I am suggesting is that in
the United States the upper limit of tolerance in terms of social and economic
stresses and strains may be set at around $70,000,000,000. At the
$60,000,000,000 income level we can afford to spend heavily to forestall
any further decline.

The objection will almost certainly be raised that the argument which I
have directed against continued governmental spending to the point of full
employment, could equally well be directed against private investment,
once the upper danger zone has been reached. I should doubt the validity
of this criticism. If the government continues to pour out funds at a lavish
rate, wage-earners and employers alike are prone to take the easy course
which leads to higher costs and higher prices. But if reliance could not be
placed upon a stream of purchasing power external to business itself, we
could expect, I think, a more vigorous resistance to uneconomic cost-raising
demands. Public spending is the easiest of all recovery methods, and therein
lies its danger. If it is carried too far, we neglect to attack those specific
maladjustments without the removal of which we cannot attain a workable
cost-price structure, and therefore we fail to achieve the otherwise available
flow of private investment.

There are no easy answers to the problems that confront us. And because
this is true, economists will not perform their function if they fail to illuminate
the rapidly shifting course of economic development, and through
such neglect unwittingly contribute to a dangerous lag in adjustments to
change. Equally they will not perform their function if they fail to disclose