To fix the bearing of what I have to say, it is at the outset well to
make clear my point of view.
I believe that the democratic political movement in the civilized world
is likely to overbear all opposition: that the immediate political future
I hope, also, the ultimate political future is with democracy. Thus, I
am concerned to examine the terms on which the political democracy of
the future can be an enduring and a worth while thing.
I am, that is to say, convincedly-even, I suspect, dogmatically-a
democrat, in the sense that I believe thoroughly in popular government,
in the equality of individuals, in political rights and responsibilities, as
also in the high and substantive value of freedom in its own behalf. I
do not, however, ascribe to political freedom any essential sanctity of
ultimate or natural or inevitable rightness. I hold it, instead, to be an
issue of time and place and circumstance, as fit only for those people
that are fit for it. Democracy may easily approach to the worst of
all forms of government-in danger of being no government at all, but
mere license, disorder, revolution and counter-revolution-in the degree
that any people falls short of meeting its severe requirements. A
populace incapable of understanding its own needs, but attempting to
rule in its own interest, is almost certain to blunder into its own great
harm. It might better rely on such incidental welfare as may befall
from an intelligent and efficient government conducted primarily in another
interest. The present cult of democracy is undiscriminating.
But democracy at its credible best carries with it the highest assurance
of human welfare, precisely because it is the only government in which
the welfare of the governed becomes the direct and the ultimate problem
of the governors.
Political democracy is doubtless as readily possible in a collective as
in a competitive economic order; perhaps, indeed, is more easily possible,
in the sense of making call for a less vigilant intelligence. But I
amn not a socialist, if for no other or better reason than that I am un-
,able to make out what the socialistic ideal-the family writ large, the
brotherhood of man-would concretely turn out to be or do. I just