doctrine and ideas of natural law. The Wealth of Nations, though
written as a powerful and purposeful tract, contains an account of a
national economy as an ordered system of mass coLpperation. There was an
attempt here to find correspondence between the chaotic diversity of senseexperience
and a logically uniform system of thought-and this, it has
been said, is the essence of science. With ebbs and flows the ideal and
the practice of objective economic study gained ground in the nineteenth
century. The vitality of economic thought in England and the United
States in the last quarter of that century, after a depressing decline in the
sixties and seventies must be credited at least in part to the stimulus of
this ideal.

It was natural to assume that the twentieth century would see a continuation
of this movement and a confirmation of this ideal. The improvement
of quantitative methods, the elabo;ration of techniques of impersonal
analysis, seemed to promise greater objectivity, a more rapid building of a
factual basis for economics. In academic, business, and governmental centers
more men were grappling with economic problems. Research funds
undreamed of by the economists of the nineteenth century could be drawn
upon.

The contributions resulting from this expansion of personnel and of
resources have been substantial. The problems we face may be more acute
than those of an earlier day, our confidence in sweeping systems of thought
may be weaker, we may be more keenly aware of the lack of generality
and prediction value in our conclusions. But we do possess, I believe, sharper
analytical tools and knowledge of the details of economic life that is at once
more comprehensive and more accurate. The technical and factual foundations
of systematic economic knowledge are being extended and made
stronger every day. Despite these gains the ideal of objectivity in economics
is disputed today. Faced with the pressing problems of a world in
turmoil, many have lost confidence in the possibility of our building an
objective science, divorced from the predilections and emotions of individual
investigators.

It is to be expected that the dominant attitude in totalitarian states would
be in conflict with the ideal of a science of economics not bound up with
the ends of the state. Sombart, who typifies this attitude, rejects, for our
discipline, the reasoning processes of the natural sciences and the concept
of law prevailing in those sciences. He insists that the laws of economics
have a priori validity, and are derived directly and intuitively. To him
economic laws stand at the beginning, not at the end of research. The
laws and values thus intuitively derived have the attributes of necessity.
They shape and direct the material subject matter of economics.' This particular
formulation is new, but the design was outlined in the last century.