expand, I venture to call attention to two obstacles of a very fundamental
character-imperfect competition and the absence of any close relationship
between price and demand in the case of most of the products of these
industries. Such products as steel and cement are not used singly but in
association with other products. Consequently, a reduction in the price of
any one of them is unlikely to induce any appreciable increase in demand.
Only in the event that a reduction is widespread can it be anticipated that
demand will respond to the price stimulus. Under conditions of pure
competition in the various heavy industries a reduction in prices all round
would surely follow slackened demand, and thus help to create a situation
favorable to its subsequent expansion. Consider, for example, the situation
which would probably have developed had production of the various
products of the heavy industries been conducted by many times the present
number of companies. There would have been cutthroat competition with
disastrous consequences to many; but who can doubt that a situation would
have been created which would ultimately have induced an increased
demand?
I would not suggest that it is either desirable or possible to introduce
conditions of pure competition in the various heavy industries of the
country. The problem must be attacked in some other fashion with the
objective in view of securing by more orderly and less disastrous methods
what might be accomplished under a regime of unfettered competition.
Where the number of producers is limited, the range of choice in the
determination of business policies is widened. Planning of some sort takes
the place of the invisible hand of competition. The problem, therefore, is
to discover the kind of planning which will best serve both the interests
of the heavy industries as well as those of the community. I repeat in "the
interests of the heavy industries as well as those of the community," since
quite obviously resort to restrictions on output have been far from profitable
to the industries concerned.
What I have said about the heavy industries would seem to apply with
very little modification to the policies of various groups of organized
workers. The demand for the labor of any one group of skilled workers
is not greatly increased by anything that the group may do in the matter of
wage rates. It is only a general reduction of wage rates of all the groups
of skilled workers that work in association in producing a given product
that can be expected to exert a stimulating influence on demand. A reduction,
for example, of the wage rates of bricklayers will do little to induce
demand unless it is accompanied by a corresponding reduction of wage
rates in all or at least in a large number of the various building trades.
Moreover, even a general reduction in wage rates in the building trades
may be counteracted by an advance in prices of building materials. In