flows equally." Now, if income (or time itself) is described as a
stream merely to facilitate certain mathematical calculations, well
and good. If "flow" is used here merely metaphorically, then, recognizing
that there are limits to all metaphors, we can raise no objections
on that score. But time, unlike a stream, has no beginning or ending,
has no bounds past or through which it flows n-or does it, like a stream,
tend to move or in any way affect the things that are immersed in it.
It must, moreover, be pointed out that time is measurable only by the
succession of phenomena, and income is measurable only by the succession
of receipts, and that periodicity and measurability are of the
essence of both. The only thing that we have to go upon in the
measurement of time is the tick of the clock, the rising and setting of
the sun or some other selected succession of phenomena. Wlhat goes
on in the interval is sometlhing we can only assume. Similarly "accrual
of income" apart from receipt of income is an abstraction based
on an unprovable assumption of regularity. The reality is the receipt
of income in instalments on recurrent occasions.
In like manner the definition of capital as a "fund" is to my mind
insufficient to distinguish it from income. The term fund as used in
this connection has been authoritatively defined by Professor Fisher
as "a stock of wealth or of property, or its value," stock being in turn
defined as "the quantity of any specified thing at any given instant."
Now a quantity of income received at a given instant is distinctly a
given quantity of a specified tlhing at that instant, whether the thing
be a commodity or the abstract services which the commodity or an
instrument yields. It is only when the quantity is thought of as continuing
in possession through a considerable period of time that it is
designated as capital and that is a concept in which space is at least as
important as time.
These are indeed fine distinctions with which I have been dealing.
Doubtless they may be regarded as unnecessarily fine in view of the
admitted excellence of the definitions of income and of capital, which
are familiar. Be that as it may, these thoughts lhave been offered in
the hope that they may show that time studies are productive, and in
the further hope that if time studies themselves become recurrent new
light may be thrown into regions that are now in darkness, and Economic
Theory may yield more income.9
CARL C. PLEHN.
University of California.
'Since the delivery of Professor Plehn's address, Professor Irving Fisher has
prepared a brief note of comment, which is printed on page 64.