of economic thought-has slight relevance to these conditions. It is
true, of course, that a world economic order built on other bases than the
law of comparative costs is possible. The hand of totalitarian control can
dig new trade channels and bring orderliness of a kind into international
relations. But while we wait upon the restoration of the old order, or the
contrivance of a new one, we face a disorganized world economy and a
great impairment of productive power.

Alteration of the conditions of economic life may go further than
structural modification. Continuity that is manifest in the persistence of
patterns of change is as necessary to organized economic knowledge as is
orderliness of structure. Patterns of secular development and of cyclical
movements are examples of orderliness in change, even though they be
overlaid with a screen of variation. Here, as elsewhere, continuity is impressed
on economic activities by enduring institutions, by technological
necessities, by the persistence of consumption habits among large populations,
and by many other factors. But continuity in human affairs is always
impierfect. Time brings changes in institutions, in technologies, even in the
behavior of consumers. The profound and rapid shifts of recent years have
intensified such disruptions. They have broken the chain of secular evolution,
heightened variation in patterns of cyclical change, and altered many
of the established modes of economic life. This accentuation of discontinuities
is a chief cause of the uncertainties that trouble us today.
But it is not alone the external facts of change and discontinuity that
induce this feeling. These are but one side of the shield. The other side is
the conceptual, for understanding involves the fitting of observations into
an ordered body of thought. The full story is that these manifold disturbances
have made much harder our central task of harmonizing objective
facts and systems of economic thought. Perhaps the best example of this,
and one that lies close to the heart of our present problem, is found in the
concept of the free market, and in the existing cleavage, in this field,
between facts and traditional concepts.

The free market, as the battleground of competitive forces, has been,
of course, a central element in the economic organization of the western
world. In the realm of ideas, too, the sovereign market has been an
essential component of systematic economics. The forms into which economic
thought has been cast for one hundred and fifty years have been
shaped by it. Today this free market, and the automatic attainment of
economic harmony through the market, seem much farther from reality
than they did a generation ago. The system of ideas built on the concept
of the free market is correspondingly weakened, as an aid to understanding
and an instrument for the organization of knowledge.
It is a familiar fact, but one with clear relevance to present issues, that
antecedents of this body of ideas are found in Newtonian mechanics. That