earnings exceed wlhat is required for the necessities of life. But
the fact seems to be thCat the productive power of the nation, offset
as it is by waste and misdirected energy, is still insufficient to
provide very miuch nmore than the means of a bare livrelihood for
all, even if incone were equally distributed.
We must admit that the evidence on this point is not decisive,
for our knowledge of the amoount and distribution of the national
income is far from complete. It is sufficient, however, for estimates
in the approximate accuracy of whiclh we may place considerable
confidence. The most carefully worked out estimates
are those made by King for the United States and Bowley for the
United Kiingdom, both for the period a few years preceding the
war. The results reaclhed in these two independent investigations
tend to create confidence in the substantial accuracy of each, and
both confirm the statements I lhave miade.
King estimated the an-nual product of the United States at
$30,530,000,000, a per cm pita product of $33S2. Bowley es-timate(
l the per capita productt of h-ome industry in tbe Uniite(d
Kliingdomi at about $220, which would be increased to $2140 if we
include t-lie earni-ings of British investmiients in foreign-i countries.
rj1.'e wlhole of this product is, of course, not available for living
expenses. We must deduct the savings require(d for tl-he mnaintenance
an(l development of industry and such portion of taxes
as is not shifted to the consumner and tlhus incluidedI in living expenses.
Kiing estimnated the aninual savings in the United States
at two billions, using as a basis the increasc in the census figures
of wealth between 1900 and 1904, tbe,latest figures then available.
The fgures for 1912 showed that between 1904 anid 1912 the, increase
lhad been at the rate of four billionis. Dedtucting this sum
an(ld an allowance for taxes from the total would leave about 26
billions av(ailable for living expenses. This sum evenily distributed
with due allowance for age distribution, according to the scale
usually employed, wouild yield about $1300 for a famiiily of fathler,
mother, an(l three childrenl under fifteen years of age. According
to Chapin's estimate of 1907 it took $900 to provide for tlme physical
necessities of a lhealthful life for such a family in New York.
To quote bis exact words:
Tt s,'eems safc to conclusde from all the data we have been considerin(r
that an inicomie of under $800 is not enoighm to permit tlie mlaintenance
of a norimial standard. . . . An examination o-f the iteims of thie budget
sliows that the families laving from $900 to $1,000 a year are able, in