An advocate of our war financing has written of such development
as "tendencies of which the Treasury officials themselves were probably
only dimly aware.""a Ricardo, to a like plea in extenuation, reviewing
the entrenched stolidity of the directors of the Bank of England during
the first decade of the Restriction, made ringing answer: "I do, there-
fore, acquit them of being influenced by interested motives but their
mistakes, if they are such, are in their effects quite as pernicious to the
community."37
4. Beginning with the flotation of war loans at an artificially low
rate, the Treasury was driven to support the "borrow cheap" policy
both as to the bond buying and certificate issue by insuring a low
preferential discount rate at the federal reserve banks. Made'possible
by political domination of an essentially non-political institution, this
misuse of the federal reserve system as the handmaiden of the Treasury
was attended with severe penalties.
There was injected into the exchange mechanism of the country a
great body of deposit and note currency entirely unrelated to com-
mercial needs and serving fiscal rather than monetary purposes. With
inflation came gross depreciation in the monetary standard and dis-
tress-causing rise in living costs. Higher prices of materials and ser-
vices added to the cost of war and weighted its overhang. Excessive
gains were reaped, unrelated to valid enterprise. Undeserved losses
were suffered by the depreciation of public loans. Worst of all, cheap-
ened credit stimulated extensive speculation, with still further rise in
prices and capital shortage.38
instrument of inflation and the funded debt is not." As practical a financier as
Mr. Warburg must however recognize that the question in issue is not as to hypo-
thetical possibility but as to the positive occurrence. That certificate borrowing at an
artifically low rate "by credit," and therefore of necessity from the banks, was
responsible, during the war and more particularly after the armistice, for a vastly
greater degree of inflation than would have attended funding operations, at rates
dictated by the market valuation of capital and in forms designed for investment
absorption-is, I fear, a conclusion which the inquiries of the Cunliffe Commission,
the penetrating analyses of Professor Pigou, and a mass of evidence in England and
the United States, remove from further controversy.
As to Mr. Warburg's statements that our borrowing machinery was "the best
that could have been devised" and that "no other way was open to pay for the war"
-valuable as are such opinions coming from one "right in the midst of it"-I can
only anticipate the views developed below, that scientific verity and not assumed
expediency is the ultimate standard by which fiscal policy even in war-time, must
be appraised.
-aE. L. Bogart, in Political Science Quarterly, March, 1920, p. 160.