be a permanent decrease of production or the abandonment of all
at-tempt by the wNorld at large to escape froimi a (lepreciated paper
basis, the error of the economists of 1914 will prove to be in the
time required for fundamnental economic forces to work out their
result and not in the ultimate result itself. The influences which
retard the fall in prices are the same influences which retard the
rise of interest rates. When these influences are exhausted and the
fall in prices occurs, it may also be found that what we might
term the real interest rates, the burden imposed upon tlhe borrower,
the per cent on value actually received which he has contracted
to repay, have risen more rapidly than nominal rates.
In the face of what I have said concerning the danger of prophecy,
and of what seems to be the tendency of events at the moment,
I will venture one more prediction strictly in accord with
the current theory of econolmiics. As a result of the war the
United States has changed from a debtor to a creditor nation
and bids fair to again take its place in the ocean carrying trade.
For ne-arly fifty years we have had a so-called favorable balance of
trade which has been tremendously increased by the war.
The permanent as distinguished from the temporary influences
set in operation by the war are working, however, towards an increase
of imports relatively to exports. We cannot expect permanently
to maintain the great excess of exports over imports
which has characterized our commerce since 1873. This readjustment
of our trade balance may be teinporarily modified and
postponed by continue(l grants of foreign credits, by investments
in foreign securities, and large expenditures by American travellers
abroad. It is bound to come in the end. I make no predictions
as to the time involved.
But if the war has made clear that economic science has not
yet reached a stage of conmpleteness which affords a secure basis
for prophecy, so far at least as the timne required for its fulfilment
is concerned, it has without question confirmed the truth of certain
fundamental facts and principles which lie at the basis of the
current teaching of economics. Nothing could have brought out
mnore clearly than did the war the truth, taught in every class in
elementary economrlics, that the fundamental economic facts and
processes are the same uinder our higlhly organized industrial system
as in the most primitive coinmunity, that the measure of man's
economic power is hiis ability to produce the goodls whieli le needs,