fact they are. Individually they are often, if not usually, fully
aware of the cooperative aspect of the relationship between employers
and employees and alive to the dependence of favorable conditions for
their constituents upon efficient and economical production. But the
very form of the organizations which they represent precludes them
from being as cooperative in their practical attitude as the representatives
of company unions. Since they deal with many competing employers,
some considerate of their employees, some hard-faced exploiters,
they necessarily conceive of the interests they represent as on the
whole opposed to the interests of the employer and deem it their principal
business to force employers, through the pressure that organization
enables them to exert, to grant more favorable conditions than these
would voluntarily concede.

It requires no argument to prove that company unions are likewise
more conducive than trade unions to the continuous operation of the
industries with which their members are connected. When not pledged
by their constitutions to refrain from strikes, as are many of the railroad
company unions recently organized, they are deterred from such
activities by the lack of outside support.

While the evidence thus favors the company union as the better
agency for promoting economy and efficiency and continuity of operation,
the argument seems all on the side of the trade union from the
viewpoint of the employees' chief interests-favorable wages, hours,
working conditions, and participation in determining these conditions.
The company union is obviously not equipped to contend effectively for
better conditions with a reluctant employer. In the first place, all
the members, including even the officials of the organization, are
employees of the employer to be influenced and dependent upon his
good will for a livelihood. Second, because of their local character
they are debarred from acquiring knowledge of conditions in other
establishments where perhaps wages, hours, and working arrangements
are more favorable and thus are unable to exert the pressure which
possession of this knowledge would make possible. In the third place,
again because of their local character, they can offer no effective resistance
to adverse changes initiated by the employer, since without
outside support they can do little more than protest against what they
consider unfair.

The trade union enjoys obvious advantages at all three points. Its
officers and most of its members are independent of any individual
establishment or company and therefore can more aggressively press
for desirable changes. Second, its officers are in contact with conditions
in the given industry throughout the country and able to use
this broader knowledge effectively in connection with any local controversy
that may arise. Third, knowledge that his employees have