changes germinated and spread in the realm of ideas. They altered the
intellectual climate, but the basic phenomena of biology and physics were
unaffected. The revolutions of our generation fall on another front. The
tides of change that have flowed during the last twenty-five years, and that
have reached flood proportions in the past decade, strike deeply at social
institutions. The ordinary affairs of life are affected for men everywhere,
as they have not been for centuries. Economics and the other social sciences
lie in the direct track of the cyclonic disturbances of our time. Not only are
conditions of inquiry and systems of ideas affected. The structure of social
life is being modified; the patterns of temporal change in social life, to
which we have in some degree adapted ourselves, have been altered. Profound
changes have occurred in the subject matter of research itself. It is
not surprising that understanding has lagged.

One aspect of these changes has special significance for us. The concept
of a free market occupies a central place in economic thought. Complete
freedom has never been achieved, it is true; but a system of thought based
on the assumption that such freedom exists had strong claims when it
could be believed that obstacles to freedom were being steadily reduced.
From a world view this is clearly not so today, nor are there reasons to
believe that it will be so in the piroximate future. With decline in the free
market and the persistence of other fundamental changes, mechanistically
based concepts lose much in relevance. We are struggling toward alternative
concepts adapted to our needs in seeking to understand the complex of free,
controlled and regulated elements in contemporary economies as they
change over time, but our constructs still fall short of our needs.
I have touched, finally, on the possibility of impartial and unbiased
research under the conditions of social disturbance and conflict that prevail
today. Economists may have erred at times in the naive belief that description
of an existing system is the whole of their scientific task. The counterswing
that leads to rejection of objectivity and deliberate advocacy of
particular ends is, I have suggested, equally dangerous. Neither promises
most effectively to promote the accumulation of a body of knowledge
relevant to the urgent needs of the day. I believe that we can deal objectively
with both means and ends, that we can bring into our inquiries value
judgments and opinions as to the ends of social action-even widely differing
judgments and opinions-without becoming partisans and protagonists.
Promise 'for our science lies in this direction.

Under the conditions prevailing in the world today American economists
face heavy responsibilities. The task of keeping a body of knowledge alive,
of maintaining the right of economists to deal obijectively with facts, means
and ends is primary among these, as a continuing duty. This task cannot
be performed by our colleagues on the continent of Europie. Here, where
inquiry can still be free, free of class, race or nationalistic bias, free of