communication through which the people of a democracy gain their
impressions of the purposes of other states.

However slight their foundation, these impressions, like our general
views of the nature of international economic competition, help to
determine our attitudes and to shape our conduct. Fear of the power
and the purposes of American trusts was one of the reasons Germans
gave for the organization of cartels in some of their export industries.
The German cartels, in turn, figured largely in the discussions which
led to the Webb-Pomerene act of 1918,-a particularly invidious piece
of legislation, which permits in our export trade combinations of a type
that is illegal in our domestic trade, with the proviso that such combinations
shall not "restrain" the trade of or compete unfairly with
American competitors.

In a hundred other incidents where retaliation leads to retaliation,
anyone who cares to look may see part of the actual process by which
a world of gossip and of myths becomes the world of national policies.
Nothing else is possible so long as each separate state is not only the
guardian of its own interests but is also the interpreter of the interests
and purposes of other states. There is no more ground for hoping
that these types of economic friction will be done away with by changes
in the policies of separate states than there is for expecting that
armaments can be reduced effectively in any other way than by common
agreement among nations.

In certain limited fields of economic activity, common agreements
have already been reached and organs of international administration
have been established. This is notably true in respect of communications
and transport, where elementary considerations of convenmence
and economy, as well as the common interest in uniform and nondiscriminatory
rules, make agreements imperative. The advantages

of conformity are plainly visible, while there is little in nonconformity
to which even a fictitious "national interest" can be attached.
There is more significance in what has been accomplished in freeing
transit trade from duties and from unreasonable transport charges
and in creating international easements in important rivers and canals.
Here the interest of a particular state may sometimes be opposed to
the interests of other states. Taking advantage of a favorable geographical
position, it might take tribute from the commerce which
crosses its territory (as states often have in the past). There has been
an element of compulsion-sometimes the compulsion of stronger states
and sometimes the compulsion of circumstances-in the progress that
has been made in these matters. To take only one example, the provisions
relating to freedom of transit in the treaties concluded at the
end of the World War, one-sided though those provisions were, helped