the future, seems small. If the advance made is to be held and the promised
peaks of prosperity are to be permanently possessed, further pioneering
is called for.
What then are the unsolved economic problems which constitute the
frontier of our science? It has been said that no two economists agree
on anything, and perhaps no one here will accept this list as complete
or satisfactory. But in this time of industrial depression there will be no
dissent if the fluctuations of the business cycle and recurring unemployment
be named as the most important and urgent problem. Nor would
there probably be serious dispute if the conviction were expressed that
a rational system of economics would endeavor to control such obvious
economic irrationalities as the spending of money on reclamation in
spite of agricultural overproduction, the continued waste of economic
resources, unbalanced and misdirected production, wasteful marketing,
foolish spending under pressure, inequitable distribution of the national
income, the toleration of preventable disease and needless accidents, the
breeding of the unfit and the degenerate, the selection of ignorant or
corrupt officials for public service, the cultivation of national and international
antipathies, and the inexcusable folly of competitive armaments
and war.
The list of unsettled questions might be lengthy, but it is not upon
this note that I wish to conclude. An efficient material civilization has
been developed by which man has lifted himself higher above the level
of savages than has ever been done before. The physical plant which our
engineers have built up is probably adequate to our present needs. After
the conquest of the material world new domains of ethical, intellectual,
and artistic achievement lie open before us, which can only be attained
by the great mass of the people, as becomes a democracy, when they have
been freed from drudgery and dulling manual toil. Aristotle once said
that if the shuttle would weave by itself and the plectrum play on the
lyre without hands, then the chief workmen would not need helpers nor
civilization slaves. The conditions laid down by Aristotle have in effect
been realized and as a result not only is modern industry carried on by
free men, but abundant leisure is assured for the development of finer
manifestations of religion, beauty, appreciation, and culture.
The work of pioneering has carried us from the Atlantic to the Pacific
coast, from a hard struggle with nature to a high level of material comfort,
but the task is not yet completed. Denied further lateral expansion,
the pioneering spirit is moving vertically and is raising our material and
cultural standards to higher levels. The frontier is thus pushed upward
rather than outward. On each loftier plane new boundaries offer fresh
challenge; the frontier recedes as we progress and stimulates to renewed
efforts. The boundaries of our science are not fixed; they reach up to