In taxation, says the cynic, "let me make the deals and I care not
who makes the ideals." How far we should go with the cynic, will be
discussed hereafter; but I think we must begin with him.
While taxation may not have started as a class struggle, and while
the class element is modified in the United States by the operation of
constitutional inhibitions, modern taxation or tax-making in its most
characteristic aspect is a group contest in which powerful interests
vigorously endeavor to rid tlhemselves of present or proposed tax burdens.
It is, first of all, a hard game in which he who trusts wholly to
economics, reason, and justice, will in the end retire beaten and disillusioned.
Class politics is of the essence of taxation.
This truth applies not only to the political game of tax-making. It
affects vitally the economist's thinking about taxation. Contest and
class politics by themselves yield neither the truth nor sound taxes. But
they are indispensable elements in discovering what is truth and sound
policy in matters of taxation. For each sound principle of taxation
laid down by the economist or statesman, the taxpayers themselves, in
bitter struggle, have brought to light a half dozen. The intellectual
interest of the aloof thinker is not enough. The creative inspiration
of contest is also needed. Clashing litigants have made more good law
than wise legislators and disinterested judges.
The truth not only emerges from contest, but the contest in part
determines what is the truth. In this domain of life and thought, the
facts are in some part what our own efforts make them. Expenditures
and revenue yields are dependent in material degree upon the resistance
of the taxpayers themselves. Tax reduction exercises a potent check
upon proposed expenditures. Fear of a deficit spurs fiscal officials to
settle old tax cases-both to pay refunds and collect back taxes with
greater promptness than would otherwise be exercised. There are over
18,000 unsettled tax appeals pending before the United States Board
of Tax Appeals, in which the government claims approximately
$550,000,000 additional taxes. Past experience shows both that there
has been harmful delay in the settlement of these cases, and that settlement
yields approximately one-half of the additional taxes claimed by