urgent present needs. The course of development of the social sciences
exhibits no such independence of the course of actual events. We have
moved from practical problem to practical problem ever since the first
mercantilist writers tried to clarify the rules of foreign trade and the
physiocrats sought release from a system of taxation and regulation that
was destroying the basis of a civilization. Today, too, the greater part of
our economic thinking revolves around the problems of the day. When we
shall have worked through the data of war and post-war adjustment, of
depression and recovery, every part of our system of thought, even to the
most refined theory, will have undergone modification.
The economist cannot justly be criticized as aloof to the issues of the time.
Where he may fairly be criticized lies in the slowness of his response.
There is too long a lag between the questions put to him and the answers
he works out. In a slow moving world like that of the nineteenth century
this perhaps made little difference. In a world undergoing transition the
answers may come too late to be of value.
Collectively the economists of today represent an incomparably greater
mass of trained thinking power than those of an earlier world. The public
holds them responsible, collectively, for applying this power promptly to
the issues of the time, that the inevitable adjustments of a period of transition
may be made without unnecessary friction and waste. But we are not
organized to carry a collective responsibility. We alone are left of the era of
rugged individualism, each staking his own claim and exploiting it or
neglecting it as he pleases.
The time has come when the economists need to organize themselves
effectively to do the work which society may reasonably require of them.
We shall be organized not indeed to replace the work of the individual
scholar by that of associated groups. Most significant work will always be
done by the scholar working as an individual. But we shall make a real
effort to keep our whole personnel alive to the issues of the time. We shall
know what resources we have for dealing with these issues, and we shall
use our organized moral forces to encourage the full employment of these
resources for the general good.
ALVIN JOHNSON
New School f or Social Research