increase in the output of final goods. If the ratio of real capital to real
income remains constant, there is no deepening of capital; but if this ratio
is constant and real income rises, then there is a widening of capital.
According to Douglas2 the growth of real capital formation in England
from 1875 to 1909 proceeded at an average rate of two per cent per annum;
and the rate of growth of capital formation in the United States from 1890
to 1922 was four per cent per annum. The former is less than the probable
rate of increase of output in England, while the latter is somewhat in excess
of the annual rise of production in the United States. Thus, during the last
fifty years or more, capital formation for each economy as a whole has apparently
consisted mainly of a widening of capital. Surprising as it may
seem, as far as we may judge from such data as are available, there has been
little, if any, deepening of capital. The capital stock has increased approximately
in proportion to real income. This is also the conclusion of Gustav
Cassel;3 while Keynes4 thinks that real capital formation in England may
have very slightly exceeded the rise in real income in the period from 1860
to the World War. If this be true, it follows that, in terms of the time element
in production, which is the very essence of the capital concept, our system
of production is little more capitalistic now than fifty or seventy-five
years ago. It requires, in other words, a period of employment of our productive
resources no longer than formerly to reproduce the total capital stock.
The "waiting," so to speak, embodied in our capital accumulations is no
greater today than half a century or more ago. Capital has indeed grown
relative to labor. Thus the technical coefficient of production, with respect
to capital, has increased. While this indicates a more intensive application of
capital relative to the other factors, it does not necessarily imply any deepening
of capital.
In important areas the capital stock has not increased significantly even in
relation to population. This is notably true in the service industries. Moreover,
in the field of housing real capital has little more than kept pace with
population growth. In manufacturing as a whole it is certainly true that real
capital formation has not only far outstripped population but has also risen
more rapidly than physical product. The studies of Douglas for the United
States and Australia show that real fixed capital invested in manufacturing
increased more rapidly than physical output of manufactured goods. On the
other hand, Carl Snyder's5 data, which run in terms of value of invested
capital and value of product, indicate that for important separate industries,
such as textiles, iron and steel, and petroleum, capital has grown little or no
faster than output since about 1890. With respect to the automobile industry,