solution, the quickly-working one, is of necessity a defective one. The
immediate solution to a problem no doubt frequently serves also with
tolerable satisfaction as a permanent one, and in some cases may well be
identical with the optimum permanent solution. Many problems, moreover,
are themselves temporary in nature, and require therefore only
temporary solutions. The immediate solution may be the only one for
which public acceptance is obtainable, so that there is really no choice.
There are circumstances, moreover, under which even a benevolent dictator,
with no need to give heed to public clamor, would be wise to adopt a
partial and temporary, but quick-working, solution in preference to a
more complete and more lasting one which would yield its benefits only
after considerable delay. Mr. Keynes, speaking with at least a trace of the
accent of revelation, has told us that in the long run we'll all be dead.
What I presume he meant by this apparently crystal-clear dictum was that
if we took the long view, we, including our otherwise potential posterity,
would-or might-all be dead-or dead or unborn-before that view
could justify itself. This warning is scarcely much needed either by the
public official or by the ordinary legislator, but for the reasons I have
stated and not only because in respectable communities the dead and the
unborn cast no votes. But for the academic economist it is a sound warning,
and perhaps even a needed one. In times of severe social strain there
may be real menace of catastrophe if there is not resort, even at the cost of
bad after-effects, to a quick-working remedy which tides the economy over
the crisis. At such times, the patience of the orthodox theorist may be out
of place. But in the past, at least, such times have come only rarely.
Closely related to the habit of the theorist of preoccupying himself
with those effects of proposed legislation which are more distant in time
is his habit of searching for the repercussions of legislation which are soto-
speak more distant in space. Politicians are experts in tracing one kind
of repercussion, the political. But they are indisposed to take account of
economic repercussions, as the history of tariff controversy abundarntly
demonstrates. This indisposition, I think, they share with the general lay
public, to whom, in matters of economic analysis, one step at a time is
enough, if not too much. And since what the public doesn't know can't
hurt the legislator, he has at least no selfish motive for following the
theorist in his unsteady and circuitous wanderings from the proximate to
the secondary, to the tertiary effects, and is content to act in terms of the
seen, with worry about the unseen left to the economic theorist as a sort of
occupational psychosis.
I do not include in my list of the handicaps peculiar to the economic
theorist as a participant in the policy-formulating process two items which
would probably appear high on such a list if prepared by those with
whom the economist works-namely, first, his ignorance as a rule of the