general welfare and maintenance of the market for the bulk of consumption
goods, all require this.
Whether I have successfully sustained it or not, my position is that there
is a case for collective dealing, though it offers no panacea. The problem is
to secure the advantages of standardization and the needed pressure toward
efficiency and elimination of waste, and at the same time to establish such
relations between industries as will give an economical industrial structure
and relatively fair employment conditions. But why should this not be
worked out through codes of fair competition or through some less direct
form of government intervention?
This question I cannot discuss save in one of its aspects. Frequently it is
said that code making and enforcement render or should render organization
of labor unnecessary. Experience has shown this to be untrue. What a
code contains depends very much upon whether labor is effectively organized
and articulate. Code administration depends almost as much upon the
same thing. Pressure group must be balanced by pressure group under democratic
government.
A final word. Unionism means a new government in industry. Any government
is what that government does with its problems. Employers should
accept the principle of collective bargaining in good faith. Labor organizations
must be alive to their responsibilities to industry and to the consuming
public as well as to their members. While militant on occasion, they must
be cobperative in production. There should be a reasonable correspondence
between wages in different industries if a sound economy is to be realized.
Perhaps all this is too much to expect from pressure groups, with or without
collective bargaining. Government must step in; it has and will remain.
Government should provide the indispensable chilled steel tools-that is,
unquestionable data on wages, hours, turnover, costs, etc.-and adequate
machinery for conciliation, mediation and voluntary arbitration, to smooth
the way for joint dealing to the end that the unsocial powerful may be
held in check and that reason may be permitted to prevail. Given reason
and good faith, out of this welter of collective bargaining there may possibly
emerge desirable social habits in industry.
HARRY A. MILLIS
University of Chicago