which give to such incidents a meaning, an element of dramatic
interest, an easily recognizable place in the general course of events.
We meet it in some of our books on international politics and in some
of our histories-particularly in those that have been written during
the last thirty or forty years. We find it in the reports by which a
country's representatives in other lands keep their own government
informed of matters which may be presumed to affect its interests.
It even has a special literature of its own-a literature which had a
mushroom growth during the war.
Such interpretations of the economic relations of nations utilize
a set of familiar concepts and phrases: commercial warfare, the
struggle for markets, the control of raw materials, surplus products,
surplus population, economic imperialism, economic penetration, and
the like. Phrases such as the struggle for (national) existence and
the survival of the fittest are also pressed into service, carrying with
them the suggestion that international economic rivalries have an
appointed place in the processes of nature.
There are two different ways of handling this apparatus of ideas.
The distinguishing characteristic of one of these methods is that
national groups are depicted as alert and intelligent personalities,
conscious of their purposes and deliberately choosing the means of
achieving those purposes. Their foreign policies are conceived in
terms of strategy, of calculated economic advantage. They are, in
short, rational, or Machiavelian, states.
The other way of dealing with this common stock of notions
employs the apparatus of historical determinism. Causes, not purposes,
rule. National policies and national destinies are shaped by
the cumulative pressure of antecedent forces. The fruits of this
particular method are a variety of pseudo-scientific dogmas respecting
the "ultimate" causes of war. I call them pseudo-scientific because,
although they borrow the mask of science, they are and must be
arbitrary and unverifiable.
Of these various dogmas the one which has had the most pervasive
influence is the Marxian. This doctrine is to the effect that changes
in industrial technique, coupled with the private ownership of those
instruments of production through which alone the fruits of technical
progress can be realized, bring about a disparity between a country's
power to produce and its power to consume. The surplus product
accumulates in the market, where it leads periodically to crises. Endeavors
to find an outlet for it lead to economic rivalries among
nations, to the exploiting of undeveloped or backward countries, to
colonial expansion, to economic imperialism, and to wars.
The rational state does not appear in this picture. Instead there