persisted. Ideas of organic growth and evolutionary change influenced the
thinking of Ricardo, Malthus and many later economists. Marshall stressed
continuity of development, explicitly recognized the role of time in economic
adjustments, and made much use of biological analogies. John R.
Commons, examining the legal foundations of capitalism, and J. M. Clark,
studying the instrumentalities of social control, depart widely from simple
mechanism. With the passing years a variety of elements has been incorporated
into what was once a simple and elegant body of doctrine. But
at the foundation of formal economic theory, today, there still stand concepts
of static equilibrium, of a universe of balanced forces, of a fixed and
essentially unchanging order.

The general acceptance of the concepts we have been discussing rested
in part on faith in the expected progressive removal of vestigial frictions. A
nineteenth-century observer could well believe that the nations of the
world were on the way to closer economic resemblance and greater international
unity. The free market was spreading. Coupled with an international
gold standard it promised to dominate economic activities throughout
the world. The actual movement, however, has been in the other direction.
For economics, perhaps the outstanding fact of the fifty years that
have elapsed since the publication of Marshall's Principles is that observed
discrepancies between objective reality and conceptual schemes based on the
assumption of market freedom have been intensified, not lessened. There
may be grounds for doubting this if we look at our own country alone.
There can be none if we take a world view. Less and less does the sovereign
market of economic theory accord with the actual market in which goods
and services are exchanged. Today, faith in the free market as the mechanism
through which economic activities may be regulated and economic
order achieved in a world of conflicting needs and aims has been sorely
shaken. Neither at home nor in our international relations do we rely upon
the uncontrolled market to allocate resources or to effect other necessary
economic adjustments.

It is a decisive fact for our generation, and one that is crucial for economic
thought, that we may not look to the arbitrament of the market for
the full adjustment of means to ends, and for the unplanned solution of
the economic problem. This is not to say that automatism has been completely
replaced, or that we have today either the knowledge or the administrative
power which would provide us with substitutes capable of
performing all its innumerable and intricate functions. Vast numbers of
adjustments are still effected through the operations of free or only partially
regulated forces. But over large areas of the western world the major adaptations
of economic means to conflicting possible ends, the major decisions
concerning uses to be made of limited resources, are not made through the
free inter-play of market forces. And even in our own economy, control and