out of the present system by methods which will preserve the continuity
of our development; or will a violent break be unavoidable? This seems
to be the real question; and the world will not give us unlimited time to
work out the answer.
Those who, like myself, have been brought up in the liberal tradition of
gradual change, will approach this question with a strong leaning-call
it a prejudice if you will in favor of evolutionary rather than revolutionary
methods of change, urging that the former be given the benefit of every
reasonable doubt. Personally, I hope most earnestly that evolutionary methods
will prove sufficient; but I recognize that this is hope, not prophecy.
To make it come true will be one of the most difficult things a nation ever
undertook; but it is not yet proved impossible.
If this is a true estimate of the probabilities, it places the future work
of the economist in a very different setting from the atmosphere of relative
stability and certainty in which our predecessors operated. It points to the
likelihood of a world full of trial-and-error experimentation, in which the
more deliberate studies may seem fated to reach their goal, if at all, too
late to render service. That chance some of us must take, while others grapple
with the more immediate issues.
Problems for Economists
As to the technical problems facing us as economists, many have been
dealt with at these meetings, and I shall mention only three groups by
way of illustration.
In the field of economics of wage levels, what is the character of the
demand schedule for labor under different conditions? What are the effects
of wage changes on the threefold function of wages (a) as incentive
to the worker, (b) as cost of production to the employer, and (c) as purchasing
power furnishing demand for goods? Are the requirements of
these three functions in harmony, or if not, can they be brought into
harmony?
In the theoretical field, there is a whole class of questions arising where
a given economic change may have either self-limiting or cumulative
effects or both, the question being to distinguish the fields within which
these two opposite effects occur-in short, to give us a better systematized
basis for judging which kind of effect to expect in any given case. For
example, under what conditions, or over what periods of time, will spending
more for radios leave the country less to spend on other things, and
under what conditions will it leave more? Under what conditions are
imports a loss to our national economy and under what conditions are they
a gain?
Another large class of theoretical questions has to do with introducing
t1me elements which have not yet been introduced into familiar concepts.