upon public policies. Massie, never widely read, had long since been
forgotten. Hume's Political Discourses had, a generation before, entered
into the general equipment of the publicist and become mere
common sense. Sir James Stewart's stately volumes gathered dust
on the shelves. Godwin's Political Justice-destined to exercise a profound
impress upon a succeeding generation-was accorded the neglect
which Pitt observed could be safely imputed a work that sold
for three guineas. Bentham, writing from the first-in Dumont's
phrase "never as the historian but alwavs as the legislator,"-had
shown his mettle, but hardly more. The Essay on the Principle of
Population, two years after its publication, was still a sacrilegious
lampoon for which its anonymous author, one Rev. Thomas Robert
Malthus, should have been unfrocked.
There was, as there had been for a century earlier, a succession of
economic compositions-some not without practical result. Young,
Sinclair and Anderson made themselves felt in agricultural policies.
Eden contributed to clearer thinking as to social conditions. Richard
Price could point to the sinking fund with something akin to proprietary
interest. Yet the first decade of the Napoleonic struggle ended
with the economist, as such, neither prominent nor important.
The turn came in the second half of the war with the increasing
acuteness of economic disorders and the greater interest in economic
study. The Bank Restriction of 1798 and the ensuing derangement
of the exchanges brought forth a flood of pamphlets in polemic criticism
and defense, culminating in the Bullion Report and in Ricardo's
definitive tracts. The price of corn fluctuated wildly with the interruptions
of war-intensifying crop variations-and an 'inquiry into
the causes and remedies of the late and present scarcity and high price
of provisions" became a literary habit. Pitt's fiscal necessities and the
reluctant adoption of the income tax in 1799 precipitated a controversial
war. Malthus took formal place as the best abused man of his
day. The Berlin and Milan decrees revived, in new phase, an old
discussion as to commerce and national well-being. The sinking fund
was alternately magnified as a fiscal panacea and reviled as a national
calamitv.
Substantial as was this body of economic writing it lacked continuity
and integration. Like the currency debate of the seventeenth
century and the trade controversy of the eighteenth, pre-Ricardian
literature of the nineteenth century figures, with bare exceptions, as the
output of tract-writers and pamphleteers.
The saving elements were the concurrent growth of scientific consciousness
and the vogue of economic study-tendencies associated
with the name of Dugald Stewart. Unimportant in doctrinal contribution,