I hope you will pardon me if I seem to talk shop. I disclaim talking the
shop of that branch of the federal service with which I am at present connected.
Yet I cannot avoid the appearance of talking shop; for my views are
quite as much the result of experience and observation in industry as of
reading and reflection in my study.

The nation under the New Deal stresses collective action. The National
Industrial Recovery act permits business men to come to grips collectively
with problems which have baffled them as individuals. Section 7 (a) seeks
to safeguard the right of employees to collective bargaining. Associations,
codes of fair competition, price maintenance schemes, labor unions and employee
representation plans have developed in hot-house profusion.
The New Deal and the hope of rapid recovery stirred up the trade unions
and, more important, fired the courage of workers in many localities and industries
where unionism had never existed or had long been quiescent. There
especially the challenge of unionism encountered renewed resistance from
employers, their lawyers and economic counsel. A race developed between
so-called legitimate unions and so-called company unions, with statistical
results not accurately known. The fact is, however, that in the United States
there are now more employee representation plans, with a larger attached
membership than ever before and more unions with a larger membership
than ever before, except for a few years at the close of the war period when
union membership was in excess of 5,000,000. And the race has not come
to an end; most certainly not the clash between rival forms of organization
for collective bargaining, accompanied by hectic argument over "majority
rule," "proportional representation," "minority rights," "individual rights,"
and all the rest of it. Collective bargaining is under discussion more than at
any other time in our history, and this discussion promises to remain rife for
some years to come. I shall make brief observations on some phases of this
subject. Lack of time forbids discussion of forms of labor organization and
of governmental policy.

Before proceeding to the economic phases, permit me to remark that the