The leaders of the "historical school" inevitably had to err by excess
of zeal in order to make their contribution in establishing the principle
of relativity; no longer can anyone proclaim, as did the Manchesterists
of the mid-nineteenth century, that free trade is a doctrine
eternally valid and universal in its application. The economic historian
of our time realizes that the problems, economic and social, which confront
us are much too complex and difficult to be understood by any
one-sided approach. The co6peration of every usable method is required;
and the critical method of history, emphasizing sequential relationships,
is one among several essential tools. Like the physical
sciences in their modern interlocking, the social sciences are borrowing
from one another both tools and workers.
The historical investigation of prices now being launched, with the
aid of a substantial grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, involves
such collaboration. This history of prices, including wages, from the
earliest fairly continuous records to that point, differing of course in
each country studied, where the various price series may be linked with
those in current statistical use, is to be carried on by scholars from
England, France, Germany, Austria, Spain, and the United States, under
the chairmanship of Sir William Beveridge. Within the next five
years, the establishment of long measures of price-changes in these
countries may be expected. It is hoped to document these more fully
and make them more reliable than was possible with those produced by
such pioneers, working single-handed, as Thorold Rogers, d'Avenel, or
Wiebe. Price records will be sought which are continuous for one locality
or for homogeneous market areas. Basic price series, thus set
up, may of course be combined to show larger regional or national
averages; but the totals will not conceal the divergent weightings of
different regional price levels. A uniform general plan will be followed,
including a careful reduction of the numerous local variations in weights,
measures, and coinage, so that some approximation may be miade to
international comparisons-a procedure of especial importance, for instance,
in studying the geographical dispersion of price-changes as the
great wave of the sixteenth-century price revolution spread from Spain
over Western Europe. By separating and comparing the various
groups of prices, new light may be cast on long-time changes in the
behavior of prices and on the effect of such changes upon the attitudes
and positions of great social groups of the population at successive
periods. The investigation will require not only the association of
scholars from the several nations selected, but also the close co6peration
of a number of workers in different fields, especially of historians, archivists,
economists and statisticians. When once this relatively dependable
causeway has been thrown over the morasses of earlier economic