may be fairly sure, would be vain. For one thing, we have learned
in other fields that progress which has to wait upon men's becoming
more reasonable is likely to be delayed indefinitely. For another
thing-and here I am done with prelinminaries and pass to one of the
central themes of this paper-there is ground for challenging the
common views of the nature of international economic competition and
of its relation to war. The facts are too complex and too much
tangled to be fitted into the concepts and formulas which we customarily
employ.

We get those concepts and formulas, for the most part, from the
market place. We use them in describing and analyzing the mechanism
of money-making, of business competition. Here we find uniformities,
rational rules of conduct, out of which we build the framework of
economic science. That reliable mechanism, the "economic man," is
merely the average man, taken in his business relations,-taken, that
is, as buyer and seller. Now, save under very exceptional conditions
the economic relations of national groups are not like those of buyer
and seller. Not since the days of the crudest types of mercantilisrn
have they been so regarded by economists.

We concern ourselves with what nations should do in order to secure
their maximum economic advantage, we take account of some of the
things they actually do, and we even venture to explain or find reasons
for certain of these activities. But unless we are the bigoted devotees
of some dogmatic philosophy of history, we do not expect that the
behavior of national groups will conform to some definite rational
rule, that it will be stable and predictable.

The values of the world of international rivalry are more like tlle
irrational values of the world of consumers' choices than they are like
the money profits and the other money incomes for which men contend
in the world of commerce. Consider such phrases as economic
dominance, empire, economic independence, a place in the sun, territorial
expansion, control of markets, freedom of the seas. These
phrases denote some of the things for which men are supposed to fight.
Each has an economic significance. And yet, what discernible relation
is there between their potency for war and their economic significance?
Their real meaning appears only when they are projected against an
historical background; but there they lose any peculiarly economic
quality, and become merged in the general picture of national prejudices
and passions.

What I am trying to say has been put more skilfully by Walter
Lippman: "How does it happen that the people not concerned in a
special interest are so ready to defend it against the world? ....The
most obvious reason is that the private citizens are in the main