in the process must be distinguished. We should always be clear
in our minds as to the moment of reference; whether it be the beginning,
the end, or the specific present. The need for this accuracy in statement
scarcely requires elaboration. It is really no more than common
intellectual tidiness.
The second element of novelty involves a genuine development of doctrine.
It is important to recognize the insufficiency of a concept of social
evolution that involves nothing more than the explicit manifestation of
elements that are all present at the beginning. The notion that the totality
of relations is implicit at the outset has many logical attractions,
but the historical consequences are serious. If it be true that the
end of the process is implicit at the beginning nothing really new actually
happens. Time and history would, in this case, merely display a
sequence of events which follow each other by mechanical necessity. The
difficulties involved in such a view have been extensively explored by
Bergson and other modern philosophers; and the earlier concept of process
so brilliantly expressed by Hegel must be deemed unsatisfactory.
We must adopt some concept of historical process that recognizes the
accumulation of new elements around a basic nucleus. The precise detail
of the process is not important for the particular problem in hand,
once it is acknowledged that new things happen and that the movement
of history is not a mechanical display of unconscious cosmic force. We
must, however, find some means of assimilating definitely new elements
to the moving process. Otherwise life and history are no more than a
rigidly prescribed pilgrimage of grace. The concept of evolution implicit
in the classical economics was too thin to exhibit its most significant
properties. There was so much mechanical necessity in its movement
that it afforded too little scope for the positive activities of either state
or individual. There was adaptation, but of a passive kind that was
scarcely more than a mechanical response to the material or the social
environment. The adjustments even of individuals were commonly assumed
to involve no more conscious choice than a narrow mathematical
calculation of profits and losses. Once we recognize the reality of innovation
over wide fields of activity, the significance of constructive activities
of both state and individuals becomes strikinglv clear.
The acceptance of the evolutionary concept in any broad form requires
us to assume that the end of the process of development is remote.
The present moment cannot be identified with the end of the process. We
cannot assume that our institutions are approximately mature and adequate,
so that the imperfections of social organization can be deemed
negligible for purposes of theoretical analysis. It is essential that we
should be keenly conscious that the imperfections of adjustment are
important and that positive, conscious action is essential to overcome