progress, the development of new industries, the discovery of new resources,
the opening of new territory were the basic causes of the boom, which in
turn was the progenitor of depression. Indeed he believed that once the main
resources of the globe had been discovered and exploited, once the whole
world had been brought under the sway of the machine technique, the leading
disturbing factors which underlie the fluctuations of the cycle would
have spent their force and an era of relative economic stability would ensue.
But he did not raise the question whether such stability would be achieved
at a full-employment and full-income level.

The business cycle was par excellence the problem of the nineteenth century.
But the main problem of our times, and particularly in the United
States, is the problem of full employment. Yet paradoxical as it may seem,
the nineteenth century was little concerned with, and understood but dimly,
the character of the business cycle. Indeed, so long as the problem of full
employment was not pressing, it was not necessary to worry unduly about
the temporary unemployment incident to the swings of the cycle. Not until
the problem of full employment of our productive resources from the longrun,
secular standpoint was upon us, were we compelled to give serious consideration
to those factors and forces in our economy which tend to make
business recoveries weak and anaemic and which tend to prolong and deepen
the course of depressions. This is the essence of secular stagnation-sick recoveries
which die in their infancy and depressions which feed on themselves
and leave a hard and seemingly immovable core of unemployment.
In every great crisis the struggle of contending groups maneuvering for
an advantageous position amidst rapid change whips up the froth and fury
of political and social controversy. Always there is present the temptation
to explain the course of events in terms of the more superficial phenomena
which are frequently manifestations rather than causes of change. It is the
peculiar function of the economist however to look deeper into the underlying
economic realities and to discover in these, if possible, the causes of
the most obstinate problem of our time-the problem of under-employment.
Fundamental to an understanding of this problem are the changes in the
"external" forces, if I may so describe them, which underlie economic progress-
changes in the character of technological innovations, in the availability
of new territory, and in the growth of population.
The expanding economy of the last century called forth a prodigious
growth of capital formation. So much was this the case, that this era in
history has by common consent been called the capitalistic period. No one
disputes the thesis that without this vast accumulation of capital we should
never have witnessed the great rise in the standard of living achieved since
the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. But it is not the effect of capital
formation upon real income to which I wish especially to direct attention.
What I wish to stress in this paper is rather the role played by the process