large and continuing expansion of the capital equipment of the country.
Tendencies and conditions exerting a strong positive influence in this
direction must be present. Were they present, I am confident that the
secondary obstacles which I have indicated would be readily surmounted.
For the investment of capital on a large scale, three influences or conditions
would seem to be essential. They are, first, large supplies of capital
available at low rates; second, relatively low prices for the concrete products
on which investment funds are expended; and, third, and of most importance,
reasonable expectations that there will be a satisfactory demand
from consumers for the additional goods and services resulting from the
investment of adcditional capital.

Our experience during the last few years seems clearly to indicate that
the first of these factors, a large supply of investment funds available at
low cost, does not of itself exert a sufficiently potent influence to yield
activity in the production of capital goods. Some decline in the cost of
capital and of bank credit was an inevitable result of slackened demand
incident to the depression; and this declining tendency of rates has been
accentuated by means of the monetary policies which have been adopted.
It is not possible, however, to reduce rates indefinitely for all uses of capital
by monetary action. Here, as elsewhere, there are rigidities in our economic
structure. Easy money can bring about abnormally low rates for short-time
loans of the highest quality. Easy money also exerts a powerful influence
upon quotations of bonds of the highest class, and a somewhat less potent influence
on bonds of inferior quality. Easy money may also induce rising prices
for equities actively dealt in on stock exchanges; but easy money does not,
in any short period of time at least, affect very much the cost of securing
new capital except for corporations in the highest credit. Moreover, in
the United States, owing in part to our decentralized banking system, the
pervasive influence of easy money even in the case of short-time commercial
loans is considerably less than elsewhere.

Finally, it may be observed that the effect of easy money is obstructed
because of the grave doubts entertained by investors as to the persistence
of low rates brought about chiefly by this means. Over a long period of
time, if there is an abundance of savings relative to investment demand,
the expected rate of return on investments will doubtless decline; but
when the decline in rates is induced by a monetary factor, investors are
properly sceptical as to its persistence and are, therefore, unwilling to
purchase any considerable volume of long-term issues yielding a low fixed
rate of return. While easy money then no doubt exerts some influence
tending to reduce rates of interest, it seems clearly quite inadequate of
itself to create a situation in which there shall be an active demand for the
products of the capital-goods industries.

Looking elsewhere for the failure of the capital-goods industries to