interests of workers in collective bargaining may not be limited to details of
the labor contract. To unionists generally, collective bargaining means something
in addition to wages, hours, tenure, and working conditions. For it
establishes a new "government in industry," "industrial democracy," "representative
government," "citizenship in industry," to employ a few of the
more frequently used terms. If citizens have a voice and a vote in political
affairs, why should they not have voice and vote in industry? The demand
for recognition and collective bargaining is regarded, and now safeguarded,
as a democratic right. This statement is made because unionism should not
be disposed of entirely on economic grounds, to which from this point on I
shall confine my remarks.

Three stages, or shifts of emphasis, are discernible in the evolution of the
union theory of collective bargaining.

Its first or simplest form emphasized the need of equality of bargaining
power between employer and employee. Labor spokesmen stressed the view
that the wage-earner under modern industrial conditions is a weak and incompetent
bargainer, possessed of little more than an ineffective veto power
in the refusal to accept employment on the terms offered and in the right to
quit the job when dissatisfied. The individual worker, as compared to the
employer, they say, is ignorant of the market situation and of employment
opportunities; he has little or no reserve power in funds in hand; he fears to
push a claim vigorously for fear of discrimination or loss of job; he is likely
to reason that it is better to accept or retain employment on adverse terms
than to lose working time altogether; he finds himself pitted against other
seekers of work, and the cheaper man is the successful bidder; if he has employment,
the terms of his contract, like the railway time-table, are "subject
to change without notice."

Naturally enough, the average unionist's case for collective bargaining has
run largely in terms of the concrete instance, the personal factor, "big business"
versus the economically small workman, and the short run. But,
thanks largely to intellectual friends such as Mr. and Mrs. Webb, and to experience
in a complicated world, the union spokesmen have had more and
more regard for the longer run and market considerations. Thus their second
stage has brought them to a realization of the need for control due to industrial
and market organization and the pressure of market competition. They
realize that the average employer, however appreciative of the value of good
working conditions and the needs of his workers, is under the necessity of
reducing costs because of the money-saving, chiseling practices of his less
socially-minded competitors. Competition frequently prevents employers
from doing what they would like to do in labor matters. Hence, nowadays,
we hear relatively less of balancing bargaining power between the employer
and his employees, and more of the need for standardization and control, of
placing all firms in a market on pretty much the same plane of labor costs,