cost per mile traveled. If, after you pass that point, you continue to
speed up and as you approach the final limit of speed you enter a
region in which you must expend more horsepower per mile run, or in
other words you get a diminishing return. The curves which engineers
set up to display the horsepower delivered by engines at different rates
of speed and which now begin to appear in the advertising pages of
periodicals, rise, up to given rate of speed, and then fall.
This is quite parallel to the results obtained in the cultivation of
land. Such is the pressure of our recurring need for food that we
cannot disregard time. We cannot wait for the accumulation of two,
three or more harvests. How much we can get in one season is the allimportant
consideration, and ordinarily we operate land at high speed
considering the state of the existing arts of cultivation. This we do
not so often do with mechanical appliances, for thanks to the excess
of power which many of them develop and to the ease of duplicating
them, we have less need to drive them at top speed, or to work them
to the limit of their capacity. It is also true that any worker who
is required or attempts to work at a speed beyond that at which his
physical powers operate at their greatest efficiency gives or receives a
diminishing return upon the effort put forth.
The relation of this to income may now be set forth, somewhat in the
form of a thesis. Income is essentially wealth available for recurrent
consumption, recurrently (or periodically) received. Its three essential
characteristics are: receipt, recurrence, and expendability. It is
wealth looked at primarily from the point of view of time. Income is
distinguished from capital in that capital is thought of as possessed,
not as being received; capital is regarded as continuting or enduring
and not as recurring; as wearing out, but not as recurrently consumed
or used to live on; and as something to be maintained in as enduring
a form as possible. Capital is wealth looked at primarily as standing
in space.
What constitutes "receiving income" and what is the criterion of
"spendability" are two very interesting matters which I may not stop
to discuss, save very brieflv, if I am to make clear in the short time
at my disposal the significance of time or recurrence as a characteristic
of income. So too I am forced to omit any consideration of the way
in which capital may emerge out of income by saving, or the manner in
which capital goods may under certain circumstances be included in
income.
That recurrence, more often expressed as regularity, is an essential
feature of income has been pointed out by many writers. But most of
them express it by saying that income is a "flow of wealth," a metaphor
which involves serious logical difficulties and overstresses the idea of
regularity or continuity. As I use it here, recurrence does not neces-