present or future or an approach of the day when income will be received.
A fruit tree may grow ever so large in trunk and branches,
but unless the new branches bear fruit, or are expected so to do, they
are of no value. Yet it sometimes happens that the tree, or any like
item of capital, is acquired and held for a time and then sold, all for
the express purpose of obtaining the increment in value, which increment
when realized is then used as income. It may be pointed out
that in this case the increment is regarded as one of a series of receipts
obtainable by dealing in capital assets as if merchandise. In any
event it is clear that the increase in value is due to the increase in the
fruit or the income, or to the approach of the day when there will be
fruit or income, and is only a part of the present value of the
future or anticipated income.

Common usage, furthermore, requires that each of these items shall
be considered as income only to the extent that it is net. For unless
it is net it is not properly regarded as spendable. This idea is imposed
upon us by what Thomas Mun called that "noble order of Debtor
and Creditor." Any advance necessary to obtain one's income, must
be won back before the true or spendable income is known. We may
not, however, carry the mathematical equation of debits and credits to
an extreme. The consequence of so doing is illustrated by that delicious
absurdity of the National Bureau of Economic Research when
it discovered "negative income," which upon examination is found to
mean an excess of outgo over income. But the expenses of obtaining
an income are often recouped in a receipt which contains the income
as well as the return of expense and so we have that distinction between
gross and net receipts which is sometimes carelessly called gross
and net income.

Without going into details I wish here to direct attention to the interesting
fact that the only permissible deductions from gross receipts
are those which Quesnay so illuminatingly called the "advances necessary
to obtain revenue" and that these must be recurrent. Losses,
therefore, to be deductible must be recurrent. Thus if a wage-earner's
house burns down or his automobile is wrecked, he does not consider
that his income has thereby been reduced. Losses of capital which are
not recurrent are quite easily distinguishable from losses of those advances
which are recurrent in the very nature of the processes of obtaining
income.

It was stated at the outset that the term anticipated recurrence, as
I conceive of it, does not imply a flow. A goodly number of the best
authorities, and quite recently Professors Fisher and Seligman, have
defined income as a flow of wealth or services. This metaphor of a
stream suggests Newton's description of "absolute true and mathematical
time" as something which "in itself and from its own nature