Nor does the success so far achieved in tlhe field of business administration
by officers directly or indirectly dependent upon

popular vote create confidence that such a change in the control
of industry would contribute to efficiency or progress. If one
party or the other must exercise exclusive control, the weight of
argument is in favor of the class which has a property interest at
stake.

In the past, progress in the field of politics and industry has
usually come through conflict of opposing interests. Are we yet
ready to substitute conference and cooperation in seeking the solution
which promrrises most for tlle common interests of all? It
seemed for a monient at the close of the war that we were, but recent
events can hardly be described as encouraging.

In an industrial society based on division of occupations, it is
impossible to secure harmony of immediate interests between economic
classes, whether seller and buyer, borrower and lender, or
employer and employee, just as it is impossible to secure harmony
of immediate interests between nations. Such harmony simply
does not exist. It is not impossible to secure a working basis for
cooperative action recognized by all concerned as based on reasonable
principles and promising to each better results in the long
run than could be obtained through conflict. All that is necessary
is a knowledge of the facts involved and the dominance of the
spirit of reason and far-sightedness.

There are many problems of great inmportance connected with
the coordination and smooth-working of cur extremely complex
economic system and with the distribution of its burdens and rewards,
but the fundamnental problem is still what it always has
been, the problem of increased per capita production and of the
rational and economical use of wealtlh, not a temporary increase
brought about uinder conditions which in the long run diminish
productive power and involve the sacrifice of tlhings more important
than wealth, but a permanent increase, resting on individual
efficiency, effective co6peration, and the adjustment of the number
of the population to the supply of natural resources upon
which it must in the last analysis subsist.
