In periods of war and revolution scholarship is not immune to, the forces
that affect human events. There is a tradition--an honorable tradition-of
scientific aloofness, of exclusive concern with the affairs of the mind and
the spirit at such times, but it is a tradition difficult to keep alive in an era
of total war. As individual human beings, of course, scholars feel the
weight of conflict. Many are affected as disciples of arts that have important
uses in the prosecution of war. Most immediate is the impact of revolutionary
war on social scientists, for the very subject matter of their disciplines
may be altered under the stress of profound civil disturbance. Not
least is economics involved in such changes. The full violence of the present
disorders has perhaps not yet been experienced by our science, but it needs
no prophet to suggest that the effects will be far-reaching and enduring.
Some of these effects we have already felt. Abroad, in regions where
freedom of economic thought has long prevailed, we have seen economics
reduced to a subservient art. Our colleagues have been silenced. The great
economic journals of continental Europe are dead. Throughout the world
opportunity for objective study has been seriously impaired, at a time when
it is sorely needed. But these are not the only reasons for disquiet. If we
face the realities of economic life, and set against these realities our theories,
our analytical tools, our ability to devise and direct instruments of control,
we must confess to inadequacy. Our needs outrun our means of understanding.
In his presidential address five years ago Maurice Clark said that
the mood of our generation of economists is one of doubtful potency in
the face of a great crisis. That mood has not been relieved, certainly, by
any lessening of the crisis since he spoke.
This feeling stands in sharp contrast to that of our nineteenth-century
predecessors. Except for a few troubled spirits, these economists felt at
home in a mastered world. The institutional framework had been set. The
essential nature of economic processes, tending eternally toward equilibrium
in this enduring framework, had been established. The form and central
substance of organized economic knowledge seemed to have been defined.
I do not imply that complacency dominated the thinking of these men.