This paper, taken as a whole, is a defense of the method of guiding
production in a socialist state which was just described. But that
defense really breaks into two parts. The first part is used in making
the direct defense, that is, in setting forth the specific reasons why that
method is essentially sound. The second part will be used to deal with
a subordinate problem, that is, a problem which would have to be solved
by the authorities before the plan for guiding production here advocated
could be followed. The specific nature of this subordinate problem
will be more easily brought out a little later.
So much for the two tasks with which we are to deal in this paper.
But, before starting upon those tasks, we must take a moment to explain
just what meaning will attach to the phrase "socialist state" as
used in this paper. A state so designated is here understood as being
one in which the control of the whole apparatus of production and the
guidance of all productive operations is to be in the hands of the state
itself. In other words, the state is to be the sole responsible producer,
that is, the sole person natural or legal who is authorized to employ
the economic resources of the community, its stock or income of primary
factors, in producing commodities. As such sole producer, the
state maintains exchange relations with its citizens, buying their productive
services with money and selling to them the commodities which
it produces.
I
Keeping in mind this conception of a socialist state, we must now take
up our first task, that is, the task of defending the proposition already
laid down that, in a socialist state, the proper method of determining
what commodities should be produced would be to assure each citizen
a money income and then to authorize that citizen to call on the state
to produce the particular commodities which he the citizen-wanted.
Here our first step must be to note some details which would be included
in our plan. In the first place, when we describe the proper method
of determining what commodities shall be produced as being a method
which begins by assuring to each citizen a certain money income, it is
of course assumed that said income is assured to the citizen only with
the proviso that certain conditions fixed by the state have been fulfilled.
Just what these conditions ought to be we must not take time to consider;
but, that conditions of some sort should be attached to the receiving
of an income cannot be questioned.
Another detail of our plan which is assumed is that, in determining
the money incomes to be conditionally assured to the citizens of a socialist
state, the authorities of such a state would have honestly and earnestly
endeavored to fix those incomes so that they represent that distribution
of the total income of the state which was called for in the in-