of the 1930's were to be black, or gray. Some economists, simulating too
closely, I think, the technocrats' over-emphasis of the purely technological
elements in economic process and under-emphasis of the compensating and
stimulating functions of the price system, and responding too sympathetically
to the prevailing depression, have announced a second new era, but
this time an era of perpetual gloom, the advent of the stagnant economy.
There is even developing among the preachers of the new pessimism impatience
with talk in terms of the concepts of business-cycle analysis, as
carrying the unnecessarily optimistic implication that what goes down
may some day come up. I have no doubt myself that these economists
have genuinely succeeded in finding historical trends in our economic
structure and process which operate to make the attainment of full employment
increasingly difficult. But that must always have been true, and
the weight to be attached to such findings should not be decided until
equally ardent search has been made for factors operating in the opposite
direction. Here, I take it, is an instance where appeal to the long view
may save us from accepting as an adequately historical approach what
fuller appeal to history would suggest was rather a hysterical approach.
It has long been standard dogma that budgets must be annually balanced,
and that public debts must not be allowed to grow indefinitely. Governments,
of course, have frequently violated the dogma, and not only have
such violations not invariably been followed by disaster, but it would be
a difficult task to disprove the proposition that in a substantial number of
instances they proved highly beneficial. But as I read the history of the
budget-balancing dogma, it developed as a convenient rule-of-thumb protection
against the defense of uncontrolled expenditure and continuous
deficits by the plea that the appropriate time for budget balancing was not
quite yet but just around the corner. I am even convinced that most of
the distinguished advocates of budget balancing during the nineteenth
century would have conceded, though no doubt grudgingly, that even a
continuous growth of public debt, given a moderate and asymptotic pattern
of growth, would not in fact necessarily lead to disaster. On this
question of the menace of a growing debt that virtuoso of the long view,
Adam Smith, maintained his usual balance. When, during the American
Revolutionary War, a young friend, Sir John Sinclair, lamented to him the
misfortunes, presumably financial, in which the war was involving Britain,
and exclaimed, "If we go on at this rate, the nation must be ruined!",
Adam Smith replied, "Be assured, my young friend, that there is a great
deal of ruin in a nation."

But when for the old dogma that budgets should be annually balanced
there is substituted a new dogma that budget balancing is merely a fetish,
that as long as there are unemployed resources, whatever the cause of