It goes without saying that we should endeavor to cut off every
source of inconme wlhich corresponds to no benefits received by society,
being careful not to overlook the less obvious ways in which
benefit may be derived; but it is clear tlhat if the figures which I
have used at all approximate the truth the remedy for the unsatisfactory
conditions of life of the poorer portion of the population
of even the wealthiest countries must be chiefly sought, not in a
forced redistribution of national income but in the increase of their
marginal productivity, brouglht about by a diminution in their
number, relatively to the other factors of production, an increase
in their efficiency, and in a more intelligent use of the wealth
available.
In so far as a more equal distribution of income is effected by
methods, and the opportunities which it offers used in ways, which
increase the efficiency of those who benefit by it, without corresponding
loss of efficiency elsewh-iere, it is a distinct gain. Otherwise
it is merely a palliative, and, as the figures which I have used
indicate, a palliative of ciomparatively small potency. Palliatives
may be useful, even necessary, if they do not undermine the constitution,
but they are not a cure.
Our problem is not merely a problem in distribution. It is far
more extensive and fundamental. It is a great constructive problem
in social engineering, comprising many elements, and must be
attacked along manv lines of approaclh.
We may distinguish at least five phases.
1. The problem of individual efficiency. This is primarily a
problem of health and education in the broadest sense of the term,
involving not only our school system but the continuation of training
within the shlop and on the farm. Our industrial development
has been so rapid that our educational system has failed to keep
pace with it.
2. The problem of industrial organization of the readjustment
of our industrial mechanisnm in a manner to eliminate waste of
energy and goods, while preserving in their full strengtlh the motive
forces upon which economic progress (epends.
It is in connection with this element of the problem that the
economist canl render Iis greates-t service. The chief difficulty
which faces hiim is the incompleteness of his knowledge of the
actual working of the existing system. A vast inass of information
lhas been gathered in connection w^ith the administration of
our war activities. It is of tl-he first importance that this should