these circumstances it is unreasonable to look for stimulation of business
through an initial reduction in wage scales.
As I look at the matter, both business policies and labor policies during
the last four years have impeded the development of a demand for the
products of the capital-goods industries-policies which, until recently in
all events, have apparently been regarded with unconcern, if not with
favor, by the Government in Washington. It would serve no useful purpose
to attempt to apportion the responsibility attaching to these three
parties in interest. It seems far wiser to attempt to indicate what business,
labor and the Government might reasonably be expected to do in order
to bring about the desired result of an increased demand for capital goods.
It is clearly a situation in which enterprise and risk-taking are required;
and for this reason I venture to think that the initiative should come from
business rather than from labor or the Government.
Until the advent of the current recession, it was perhaps not unreasonable
to anticipate that complete recovery would come of itself. In view of the
expectation of a rapid upward surge of prices of an inflationary character
for which some economists are in part responsible, it is not surprising that
prices were advanced in many lines upon the appearance of a slight increase
in demand, and that no vigorous efforts were made to check a rapid upward
advance in labor costs. Where there is a general eagerness to advance
prices, there is obviously no logical ground for the retention of prevailing
wage scales. It should now be evident, however, that a higher level of
prices through monetary means alone is unlikely to occur in the near future
and almost certain not to be maintained. An upward movement of prices
requires, if it is to be maintained, something approaching steady full
employment of labor. Rising prices are rather a result of activity than a
cause.
Finally, it may be noted that the attitude of the Government has now
become more favorable to an increase in the volume of production through
a reduction in costs and prices where it seems reasonable to anticipate
that an increased demand would thereby be stimulated. In these circumstances
then, it seems that the time is ripe for positive action on the part
of those concerned with the conduct of the capital-goods industries. I do
not suggest that much could certainly be accomplished through price reductions
of particular products, although action on the part of certain
conspicuous factors in the heavy industries might serve to start the ball
rolling; but, given the existing organization of the heavy industries, I
feel certain that concerted action would be far more effective. A general
reduction of prices to the point at which a modest profit would still be
realized as production approached full capacity would seem to me to
provide the basis for a general expansion in demand. Very likely at this