through the diminution in the number of workers has lessened the membership
of the unions, but their strength in proportion to the number employed
remiains relatively high. But elsewhere the destruction of skill
has meant the decline in trade-union influence.
The case of the soft coal miners has been somewhat different. It has
not been so much technological improvements in the trade which has
lessened the strength of the union, as the replacement of coal as fuel
and energy-producing material, and technological changes which have
lessened demand by increasing the power and heat-producing effect of
coal. In the trades producing substitute sources of power no effective
trade unions have developed.
The trades engaged in transportation and communication furnish
another illustration of the working of the same forces. In order to understand
the history of the trade unionism in this group of occupations
it is necessary to divide the workers into two parts as they are employed
by the railroads on the one hand and by other agencies on the other.
The railroad unions experienced an enormous growth during the war
period. The total number of organized railroad workers almost doubled
from 1915 to 1921. Since then there has been a slow decline, due chiefly
to the introduction of labor-saving methods. All the operating brotherhoods
show decreases in membership since 1924. Fewer men are needed to
move the same amount of tonnage. The whole group of persons engaged in
transportation and communication increased from 3.1 millions in 1920
to 3.8 millions in 1930. A large part of this increase was due to the increasing
use of the automobile and truck as an agency of transportation.
But the one great union representing this new form of transportationthe
Teamsters-has shown only a very moderate growth since 1923. The
Street and Electric Railway Union has shown a small decline, fully accounted
for by the decrease in the numbers engaged in this service.
We can summarize the history of American trade unionism in this
period of prosperity as follows:
(1) The iricrease in the number of occupied persons was predominantly
in fields in which trade unionism has never been able successfully
to organize any considerable number of persons.
(2) Within the traditional field of trade unionism, the loss in many
unions has been heavy owing to the introduction of labor-saving and
skill-destroying machinery. The latter feature of the movement has been
particularly important.
(3) Much the same effect has been caused by technological improvements
which have lessened the markets for goods produced by unions
of skilled craftsmen.
The history of American trade unionism in the past 30 years is
roughly epitomized by the figures for the per cent which trade-union