economics and government assume roles of importance in the political
arena where taxes are made and unmade. Tax making rises above
what the war aviators called "a dog fight."

Tax-making is, accordingly, something better than a whirling battle
of jarring sects and factions, in which considerations of equity and
sound public policy are wholly lost to view. The great number of interests
at stake and the very complexity of the fight sweeten it. There
are so many issues that with respect to many of them, a majority of
legislators and voters are unaffected and disinterested; they may cast
their votes as a more or less disinterested jury. There are thus many
important tax problems which may be settled on the broad basis of
equity and sound public policy, if one is wise and ingenious enough to
find the right solution. Here, patient research and the disinterested
mind find wide scope for their beneficent service.
Federal tax laws in recent years have been profoundly influenced by
the Legislative Counsel of the House and Senate. These men have
striven with undeviating aim to write into law the will of Congress; but
in the many important technical matters which have so frequently, in
practice and effect, been left to their discretion, they have sought trulth
and even-handed justice with a tireless devotion, which is beyond adequate
praise. Or to take another illustration: the Secretary of the
Treasury and important members of Congress who could be named, have
repeatedly in recent years fought for tax measures which they knew at
the time were foredoomed to failure. They knew the efficacy of reiterated
enunciation of the sound but unpalatable truth.

The shallow sentimentalism of the parlor idealist and the narrow zeal
of the fanatical idealist, result in little good and much harm in the field
of taxation. But the work of those who serve with humility as well as
zeal the cause of truth and justice, counts mightily. The arm of the
enlightened tax officicil slackens when he is called upon to enforce tax
laws which conflict with his sense of equity. The natural opposition to
progressive taxation of the very wealthy-one of the powerful tax
groups to which I have alluded-is moderated and frequently overcome
by prevailing doctrines of equity and sound public policy, in the
creation of which economists and disinterested students play a most
important part. In the adoption of tax legislation there come zero
hours, when the zeal of the narrowly selfish flags. At that time the
apostle of the broader, deeper, and less popular truth gets his chance.
American tax laws contain not a few beneficent provisions traceable to
some tireless lobbyist for the public good.

The disinterested fiscal truth exercises, then, a real influence. Its
action is largely critical, negative, and indirect, but it is pervasive and
powerful. The truth is mighty, even though, from my limited experience,
I see no reason to believe that it will prevail.
