presuming the antagonisms of economic interest that are assumed by the
nationalists. Nor is there any basis for the assumption that the primary
features of the territorial division of labor can be significantly modified
or controlled by protective tariffs. At the most, tariff measures can
soften the shocks produced by technological changes. These effects are
certainly not negligible, but they do not play the dominant part in economic
development presumed by the nationalists.

The hope of the socialist that poverty can and will be abolished seems
to the modern liberal merely an ungrounded act of faith; significant as
a motive for reforms, but incapable of realization. The objective limitations
to the satisfaction of our wants rest upon costs rather than
upon absolute scarcity. Former ages seldom experienced an absolute lack
of necessities: in the world as a whole there was bitter want in particular
localities, because the commodities needed were available only in a relatively
distant region. Technological improvement changes the incidence
of scarcity and of cost, but it affords no guarantee that all the requisite
commodities can be placed in the hands of all consumers under conditions
of cost compatible with the functioning of society. Scarcity has
always been relative: and in this sense it remains a permanent economic
problem. Cost must needs appear in any form of society, even though
the rules of allocation are changed. The fact that some of the costs of
the Soviet electric plant on the Dnieper were not borne by the industry
itself, does not mean that they do not exist as a factor in the budget
of the state and in the supply of consumer goods available to the people.
It is doubtless within the power of society to relieve the more extreme
forms of destitution, but there are positive limits to actual accomplishment.
The Webbs and others have shown that destitution is essentially
a phase of maladjustment. This is in part due to social deficiencies,
but in part due to the failure of the individual to meet the requirements
of his environment. Remedial measures can be applied to most of these
problems, but, even if there were no resistance to the application of the
broadest measures for social control, the actual achievement would be
partial and inadequate. Maladjustment is by nature a continuing problem.
We can only work toward mitigation of the severity of its consequences
and toward the reduction of the time required to make new
adj ustments.

These qualifications will doubtless seem very unsatisfactory to the
idealists; but much of our recent experience should remind us that
ideals have a price-possibly too great a price. The severest shocks
of the past generation have been due in no small measure to illusions
born of our ideals. The war developed during a period in which many
supposed that the new achievements of science and culture would make
war impossible. The war fought to end war produced a peace which