to 1929 which invite attention. By all the experience of the past, an
increase of membership should have occurred in these years of plenty.
But it did not. In 1929, the membership was the same as in 1924.
Moreover, the figures for membership probably exaggerate the strength
of trade unionism in 1929. It is characteristic of this statistical series,
that there is always a lag. In periods of rising membership, the figures
do not fully reflect the increase and in periods of falling membership
they do not fully measure the decline. Moreover, the increase of 75,000
in public-service trade unions from 1924 to 1929 can hardly be counted
as an increase in trade unionism in the narrower sense, since these
unions do not use the traditional devices of trade unions. It may safely
be said that the American trade-union movement in 1924-29, for the
first time in its history, did not reflect a great period of prosperity by
a growth of membership.
The full explanation of this phenomenon is not easy, and doubtless
many factors are responsible. The first explanation which suggests itself
is that the area within which American trade unions operate successfully
has narrowed relatively to the whole field of occupations. The census
of occupations throws light on this point. From 1920 to 1930, the
total number of gainful workers increased from 41.6 millions to 48.8
millions, a gain of over seven millions or approximately 17 per cent.
Of these the gain in trade, professional service, domestic service and
clerical occupations account for over five millions; in manufacturing
and mechanical trades (including the building trades), mining, transportation
and communication, the traditional strongholds of trade
unionism, less than two millions of the newcomers found placement. The
growth of the first four groups of industries were at the rates respectively
of 40 per cent, 50 per cent, 45 per cent and 30 per cent, while in the
great fields in which trade unionism has been able to establish itself
successfully the rates of growth were 10 per cent, -10 per cent, and 20
per cent. To put the matter in another way, if we exclude agriculture,
which showed a slight decrease, forestry and fishing, a stationary group,
and public service, which showed some gain, the fields in which trade
unionism has been successful showed an increase in gainful workers
of slightly over 11 per cent, while the occupations in which trade unionism
has never been strong showed a gain of 40 per cent.
These occupational changes are in striking contrast with those from
1910 to 1920. In that period the gain in the occupations in which trade
unionism is effective was at practically the same rate as the gain in the
non-organized groups.
American trade unionism remains today as it was 30 years ago,
largely confined to the occupations included in the three census categories
of mining, manufacturing and mechanical, including the building trades,