omiists"-sometimes even in vindication of rejected advocacies. The
income tax which in 1798 Pitt had imposed and in 1803 reimposed
was in 1816 repealed and the very assessment records burned. The
sinking fund after two decades of financial legerdemain was reconsidered
in 1819 and reconstituted in 1823. The House of Coinmons
in 1811 solemnly recorded its dissent from the conclusions of the
Bullion Report, only with equal solemnity in 1819 to reverse its action.
Tooke's draft of the Merchants' Petition, favorably received by Lord
Liverpool's government in 1820, established the political rallying point
for "the principles of a Free Trade policy" which a generation before
Adam Smith had regarded "as absurd as to expect that an Oceana or
Utopia should ever be established" in Great Britain.
How from this high estate, political economy in the next decade fell
to disregard and neglect is a familiar but painful chapter in the history
of our science. Inquiry gave way to dogmatism and analysis was
displaced by disputation. Intellectual independence was sapped and
scientific doctrine degenerated into barren dialectics, even into class
advocacy. Cobbett, Place, Owen and the sturdy group lately come
into its own as the "English Socialist School"-exposed "the inherent
defects and injustice of the existing system." Mallet could write of
accuracy and minuteness of definition as part of "the coxcombry of
the Political Economists". . . .continuing thereafter, in Elia's phrases,
"their minds are never caught in undress or by glimpses; their stocks
of ideas are in perfect order and completeness. You cannot cry halves
to anything they find. Between the affirmative and negative there is
no border land with them. Their conversation is a book."22
It was before this august company that McCulloch could assert
"that there could not be a farthing more capital in the country if the
national debt had not been incurred" 23 that Tooke could propose "tea
as a perfect object of taxation, because it would hardly be considered
as a necessary of life, and the quantity required by each individual is so
small";24 that Senior could maintain in opposition to the Factory bill
of 1837 that the profits of the operators accrued only in the final hour,
and that "the Factory bill was altogether mischievous.,25
The influence extended beyond "The Caledonians." In 1833 Harriet
Martineau assured early Victorianism that "The case of those wretched
factory children seems desperate; the only hope seems to be that the
race will die in two or three generations, by which time machinery may