of capital formation in securing at each point in this ascending income scale
fairly full employment of the productive resources and therefore the maximum
income possible under the then prevailing level of technological development.
For it is an indisputable fact that the prevailing economic system
has never been able to reach reasonably full employment or the attainment
of its currently realizable real income without making large investment expenditures.
The basis for this imperious economic necessity has been thoroughly
explored in the last half century in the great literature beginning with
Tougan-Baranowsky and Wicksell on saving and investment. I shall not attempt
any summary statement of this analysis. Nor is this necessary; for I
take it that it is accepted by all schools of current economic thought that full
employment and the maximum currently attainable income level cannot be
reached in the modern free enterprise economy without a volume of investment
expenditures adequate to fill the gap between consumption expenditures
and that level of income which could be achieved were all the factors
employed. In this somewhat truistic statement I hope I have succeeded in
escaping a hornets' nest of economic controversy.

Thus we may postulate a consensus on the thesis that in the absence of a
positive program designed to stimulate consumption, full employment of
the productive resources is essentially a function of the vigor of investment
activity. Less agreement can be claimed for the role played by the rate of
interest on the volume of investment. Yet few there are who believe that in
a period of investment stagnation an abundance of loanable funds at low
rates of interest is alone adequate to produce a vigorous flow of real investment.
I am increasingly impressed with the analysis made by Wicksell who
stressed the prospective rate of profit on new investment as the active, dominant,
and controlling factor, and who viewed the rate of interest as a
passive factor, lagging behind the profit rate. This view is moreover in accord
with competent business judgment." It is true that it is necessary to
look beyond the mere cost of interest charges to the indirect effect of the
interest rate structure upon business expectations. Yet all in all, I venture to
assert that the role of the rate of interest as a determinant of investment has
occupied a place larger than it deserves in our thinking. If this be granted,
we are forced to regard the factors which underlie economic progress as the
dominant determinants of investment and employment.
A growth in real investment may take the form either of a deepening of
capital or of a widening of capital, as Hawtrey has aptly put it. The deepening
process means that more capital is used per unit of output, while the
widening process means that capital formation grows pari passu with the