try, according to his findings, capital investment has risen no more rapidly
than value of product, while in the electrical industries, invested capital increased
at a slower rate than output after 1907. Considering the economy as
a whole, including fields of economic activity other than manufacturing,
there is no good evidence that the advance of technique has resulted in recent
decades, certainly not in any significant measure, in any deepening of
capital. Apparently, once the machine technique has been developed in anyfl
field, further mechanization is likely to result in an increase in output at'
least proportional to and often in excess of the net additions to real capital.
Though the deepening process is all the while going on in certain areas, elsewhere
capital-saving inventions are reducing the ratio of capital to output.
In order to get some insight into the effect of population growth upon
capital formation, it is necessary to consider the role it plays in conjunction
with other factors in the widening and deepening process. The widening
of capital is a function of an increase in final output, which in turn is due
partly to an increase in population and partly to an increase in per capita
productivity, arising from causes other than a larger use of capital per unit
of output. On the other hand, the deepening of capital results partly from
cost-reducing changes in technique, partly (though this is probably a much
less significant factor) from a reduction in the rate of interest, and partly
from changes in the character of the output as a whole, with special reference
to the amount of capital required to produce it.
Now the rate of population growth must necessarily play an important
role in determining the character of the output; in other words, the composition
of the flow of final goods. Thus a rapidly growing population will
demand a much larger per capita volume of new residential building construction
than will a stationary population. A stationary population with its
larger proportion of old people may perhaps demand more personal services;
and the composition of consumer demand will have an important influence
on the quantity of capital required. The demand for housing calls for large
capital outlays, while the demand for personal services can be met without
making large investment expenditures. It is therefore not unlikely that a
shift from a rapidly growing population to a stationary or declining one
may so alter the composition of the final flow of consumption goods that
the ratio of capital to output as a whole will tend to decline.
In the beginning stages of modern capitalism both the deepening and
the widening processes of capital formation were developing side by side.
But in its later stages the deepening process, taking the economy as a whole,
rapidly diminished. And now with the rapid cessation of population growth,
even the widening process may slow down. Moreover it is possible that
capital-saving inventions may cause capital formation in many industries to
lag behind the increase in output.
An interesting problem for statistical research would be to determine the