In this way the theory of imperfect competition has forced economists to
pay serious and searching attention to the definition of the conditions necessary
to perfect competition-something which had previously been strangely
neglected. The same principle applies to the theory of marginal productivity,
in whose mathematical implications some renewed interest has
lately been shown by mathematico-quantitative investigators. One may anticipate
a considerable development and refinement of this theory in following
out the different ways and degrees in which the underlying principle
applies to different kinds of concrete situations.
Negative criticism did not drive out "orthodoxy" from the field of
theory, partly because nature abhors a vacuum-if such a pre-scientific
expression may be indulged in. What happened during this period was
that other fields of study expanded enormously and drew more and more
apart from the central core of theory. These special fields involved much
factual study and had their own special histories, and were constantly
dealing with problems of expanding governmental action. In this way
American economics was approaching more closely to the character announced
in the early manifesto of the Economic Association. With the
entry of this country into the World War, interest in negative theoretical
criticism was overshadowed by more urgent positive needs.
Positive Inquiry of Diverse Types
With this change in emphasis, the foreground came to be occupied by
various types of positive studies, some of which were already well under
way. First, and perhaps most characteristic, was the quantitative analysis
of economic behavior, with its chief interest centered on the problem of
economic fluctuations.
This branch of study had previously been regarded as hardly respectable
for a scientific economist to take seriously, owing largely to three handicaps.
One was the lack of adequate statistical material. This left the study
of booms and depressions in the realm of speculative theories, and the
assumptions underlying them necessarily ran counter to the preconceptions
of the dominant equilibrium theory, and hence were worse than suspect
as being unscientific. Worst of all, these theories were associated with
socialistic doctrines which were beyond the pale. The first handicap has
been overcome by the development of statistics. If the problem is not solved,
there is now at least plenty of material to set one's teeth into. The other
obstacles have been worn away by a sort of attrition, aided by the waning
of the prestige of equilibrium theory and the decline of the general spirit
of optimistic faith in the spontaneous workings of the competitive system
which characterized the nineteenth century. But the most active element
has probably been the growing seriousness of the problem itself, which
could not forever be dismissed by a defense reaction based mainly on the