regulation have in recent years trenched deeply upon the areas of free
action. There may be a return, but he would be a rash man who would set
a time for it.
In stressing the mechanistic background of certain of the concepts that
have been employed in the study of the market, I have not meant to imply
that sheer mechanism plays an important role in contemporary theory. In
its obvious form it does not. We have been slow, however, to shake off
elements that derive from the static character of these antecedents. The
notion of a fixed order of things is still deeply imbedded in formal economics.
But the outstanding fact of economic life is change, change in the
institutional framework and change in the working elements of our economic
system. To recognize this is one thing. To, take adequate account of
it in seeking to interpret economic events, to incorporate the contingent
and the uncertain into our concepts, is yet another. This is one of the tasks
that confront our generation of economists.
This brief summary has dealt with facts that are largely familiar, but
they are facts that cannot be ignored in any review of the problems before
economists today. It must be a matter of major concern to us that there
exists a cleavage between the observed facts of economic life and the
formal systems of thought wherewith we seek to interpret and unify these
observations. Descriptive, piecemeal accounts of institutions and activities
and their shifting forms we have, in number. Perhaps the distinctive contribution
of our time has been the development of specialized bodies of
knowledge and specialized instruments of economic intelligence. We know
far more about national income, the structure of credit, industrial piroductivity,
the formation of capital, the earnings of labor, than we did fifty
years ago. But the circle completes itself. Variety in detail cries again for
simplifying principles. Conceptual systems that would interrelate these
diverse facts and their changes over time, systems with the sweep, generality
and apparent unifying power that were the impressive features of classical
economics in the heyday of its acceptance we have not. Which is another way
of saying that understanding has not kept pace with observation. Intellectual
discomfort is a natural result.
I would not suggest that in a universe of variation and discontinuous
change we may hope to create theoretical systems that are at once allembracing
and completely consistent with the perceptual world. In limited
areas and for limited times agreement between concepts and apparent
reality may be close, but disturbing discrepancies will persist. Driven to
seek understanding of complex phenomena, we shall continue to construct
simplifying and unifying systems; driven to make these constructs accord
with shifting and diverse reality, and unable to do so, we shall continue
to damn our systems as formalistic figments. That better analytical tools
will be forged and that fuller understanding will emerge from this troubled