negligible in practical influence, the notable service of Stewart
was in preserving the concept of economic science and in transmitting
an ardent enthusiasm for its pursuit.
The small groups who from 1799 on gathered at Edinburgh in
attendance upon his "separate course"-James Mill, J. R. McCulloch,
Thomas Chalmers, the Earl of Lauderdale, Henry Brougham, Francis
Horner, Francis Jeffrey, Macvey Napier, Sydney Smith, Archibald
Alison-were the men who contributed most as text-writers, as reviewers
and as journalists to the revival of economic study in England in the
decade then beginning.
But the largest product of Dugald Stewart's lecture room was the
prominence of economic criticism in the newly founded Edinburgh
Review. The project was from the first designed to effect practical
reform rather than to afford philosophical exercise. Undertaking to
oppose in politics, in economics, and in jurisprudence that "timorous
acquiescence in the actual system," which Walter Bagehot calls a habit
of the early nineteenth century, the Review became something more
than "the doctrinal organ of the whigs." In the field of economic
relations, its editors attempted nothing less than the formation and
spread of a sound public opinion. Issue after issue appearing with
essay-like critiques from Francis Horner, Richard Jeffrey, Sydney
Smith, Henry Brougham-a little later Malthus, James Mill, and
McCulloch-the Review became the rostrum from which olympian
judgment, sometimes biased, often truculent but rarely incompetent,
appraised the economic writings and happenings of the period.
From the new consciousness proceeded scientific dignity and popular
interest. Adam Smith had used the term the "science" of political
economy and in the next generation, thanks to Stewart's teaching and
Say's writing, the phrase had come into easy use. But from 1810
on it acquired meaning and force. The fourth edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica in that very year carried an expository article on
"Political Economy." A coterie gathered about Ricardo's breakfast
table, and personal regard cemented intellectual sympathy. Doctrinal
controversies were initiated and conducted with spirit-a remarkable
exhibit of this activity, the long missing and much desired manuscript
of Ricardo's Notes on Malthus having happily been recovered during
the past summer and being now in process of publication.1"
Academic recognition, anticipated in Malthus' appointment at
Haileybury in 1807, was more fully accorded by Pryme's lectureship at
Cambridge in 1816 "to facilitate the study of a science hitherto inaccessible
without the most arduous perseverance," even though subject to
the condition, indeed, that the lectures be not given at an earlier hour