the general burden it could recognize as its duty I do not believe. Had
the social necessity and the personal and institutional justice of the
conscription of current income been understood-the conscription of
wealth was nonsense-I believe that the war idealism of America would
have accepted the taxes as contentedly as it accepted the selective
draft. The truth is merely that we didn't know. We had not thought
it out. The fundamentals of war finance were, even to the economists,
an unknown field. We had busied ourselves with other things-the
processes and the problems of peace. Thus by error and drift we allowed
our war for political democracy to go far toward making democracy
impossible, carrying us thus dangerously forth in the direction
of those economic institutions in which political democracy cannot
thrive. We have blundered into our almost irremediable harm. We
have mortgaged our political institutions, and therewith have hazarded
either the perpetuity or the worth not only of these but of the competitive
economic order. Both must be democratic if they are to deserve
to endure, probably also if they are actually to endure.
But most of the evil effects of the war, as also some of the good,
will pass with the lapsing years. The international bitterness will disappear,
even if to the sole end of making place for others. The injustices,
the hardships, the suspicions, and the protests attending the
inflation process will fall out of recollection. The earth scars will
grow green with the changes of new springs. The war dead passed
promptly out of the domain of our problems. The war-maimed and
the war-invalided will early arrive at their infallible ways of cure. Time
will shortly have assuaged the pangs and stilled the sobs of bereavement;
or, if there come no earlier surcease, to these pangs the sun and
the rain will offer solace and these sobs the grass will muffle, the things
of yesterday ranking with all the other tales that are told-the done
and gone no part of that human experience to which the current life
is grianting its new meed of happy living.
But still not all things pass. These institutional effects of the war
in the stratification of wealth will remain with us. To these nightmare
debts no similar principle of passage or of mortality attaches. Their
life stretches indefinitely beyond the individual life, to match it, it may
be the span of racial o,r institutional duration. But surely, as I hold,
from this long-enduring body of death, the democracy of the future will
greatly stir to shake itself free. I believe also that it will succeed,
and will succeed within the limits of the orderly development of competitive
institutions. But I hold that, failing of the wisdom or the
determination for this effort, and acquiescing in this burden of debt,
democracy cannot remain democracy.