But that cannot be whiat makes them income, for there are many other
forms of income for which the recipient renders no toil.
That they come in or are received is undoubtedly one of the things
that makes them income, for that is inherent etymologically in the term.
This is essential characteristic number one. But that alone is not
sufficient, for many things are received which are never counted as
income. They are regarded as usable, consumable, and expendable
(or, more briefly, spendable) in whole or in part and as something
whiclh may properly be used to live on. And this is true although
there may be very good reasons why it is wise to save a part of them
and in fact to save as much as possible. By the term spendable, it
may be well to explain, is meant that they may be used to live on without
direct impairment of one's anticipated or expected future income.
That is, spending may not interfere with recurrence. This spendability
is a characteristic which, as we shall see, is common to all other
forms of income and may thus be put down as number two of the characteristics
we are seeking. Yet this alone is not conclusive. Treasure
trove, a gift of capital, an inheritance are all likewise spendable receipts.
That is they may be spent without impairment of anticipated
future income from sources available before they were received. But,
of course, it is not considered wise to spend these, unless they are small,
but to treat them as continuing or as capital, using only the income
therefrom for spending.

Wages and salaries, also fees received in the practice of one's profession,
and any other direct personal earnings in business or in other
activities are, in almnost all cases, recurrent, or the endeavor is to make
them so. In fact the endeavor is to make them as regularly recurrent
as possible. An isolated fee, an honorarium, or a prize received on
some rare occasion is something about the classification of which as
income there is always a doubt despite the fact that it is a spendable
receipt. The doubt apparently arises by reason of the absence of
anticipated recurrence. Recurrence then is characteristic number
three. It is moreover a characteristic inextricably interwoven with
the other two.

Next in order come interest and rents, both taken in the ordinary
business sense of those terms, and perhaps definitely anticipated dividends.
These are recognized by common usage as income. The first
two, interest and rent, have in common with wages and salaries four
characteristics. They are contractual, they are receipts, they are
spendable and they are recurrent. Dividends are, of course, not in
the same sense contractual but are recurrent, spendable receipts. These
all differ from wages in that they are not in the same sense the result
of toil. They have another outstanding feature which we have not
found before. That is, they are capitalizable. They are usually regarded