compromise than are some of the other incentives to human conduct.
Accordingly, men who are governed by the desire for gain are more likelv
to find it to their interest to seek some other way out of an economic
contest than that which leads to armed conflict. If we may be permitted
to parody one of Smith's famous passages we may say: it is not from
the benevolence of the business and financial magnates that we expect
peace to be maintained but from their regard to their own interest.
In these post-war days when the recollection of the destructiveness of
the last war is still fresh in our minds and governments are being urged
to leave no stone unturned to prevent a renewal of conflict; when nations
are pledging themselves to renounce war as an instrument of international
policy; when conferences for naval reduction and for the settlement
of reparation difficulties are causing alternating hopes and disappointments
in the minds of those who have the will to peace, it is possible
that those mieetings less heralded whose determinations are often
concealed from the public, which the representatives of private business
corporations frequently hold to settle such problems as the control over
fuels, power and raw materials and the division of the world's markets
for certain commodities, are doing more to lay the foundations of international
peace than are the more spectacular efforts of our statesmen.
In spite of much which has been written in support of the widely-held
opinion that economic causes are those most often responsible for war,
this view of the matter seems to have been greatly exaggerated and is
contrary to that held by the sociologists who have given most attention
to the subject of conflict. The struggle to comnmand industrial resources
or markets may indeed produce friction among nations and powerfully
support other motives for war, but economic differences taken by themselves
are more likely to be settled by peaceable means than are international
disputes arising from other motives.
It is not the contention of this paper that international economic
competition is self-regulating; that it can be relied upon to prevent
war through the national self-interests involved, any niore than the selfinterests
of individuals can be expected to check exploitation of the weak
by the strong. Some government action will probably always be necessary
to check monopolistic price-making by international combinations
as it has been required to limit the efforts to create domestic monopolies.
But the claim is here made that international competition within the
economic sphere is less dangerous and less likely to be destructive than
are racial and cultural conflicts. Furthermore, it is claimed that the
economic struggle among nations is itself a force which makes for international
peace.
It is true that at times certain governments have given their support
to the forces of monopoly at work in their own dominions, when such