records of the pre-war century formed merely the initial and preparatory
stage. We are far from the saturation point of supply; and the
demand is unappeased.
This quite modern craving for exact knowledge of economic and social
institutions and processes is a definite symptom of the advent of a
new historical era, which was ushered in toward the last quarter of
the nineteenth century by a definite reaction against the regime of
unfettered, individualistic, secretive competition. Urgent social need,
felt a century earlier in Western Europe and in the regions within its
radiating influence, had unleashed the individual, long straining for free
activity; and this release in turn had stimulated the demand for ever
more intense production. The world witnessed an unrivalled outburst
of industrial energy, an unprecedented movement of migration, an age
of unexampled magnitudes and speeds. The spurt of initiative was assisted
by a new theory and a resulting policy, in law and economicsrationalistic,
hedonistic, individualistic, and dogmatic-which, with the
clear-cut certitude of a new faith, enforced the destructive but energizing
work of liberalism. But, unfolding with an inner logic of growth, out
of the older order emerged fresh forces and institutions. Protectionism,
with tariffs facing outward and dikes of combination crossing inwardly,
restrictionism in its various aspects, including its check on the free
flow of immigration, and nationalism in intensified forms-with intercluded
social cooperative organizations-were among the manifestations
of the new spirit. But meantime, with the growing complexity of
the social situation, new concepts of relativity, of evolutionary adaptation,
and of social solidarity were steadily undermining the former certainties
of an automatic, mechanical, predestined harmony. The altered
pattern of men's thinking, even though, or perhaps because, it
was accompanied by a sense of fluidity, has reinforced the dominant demand
for stability and social controls.
The need for wisely adapted and therefore more effective controls
underlies the craving for more statistical knowledge. If we are to have
better social controls, we must have records, many more of them, and
more men trained to interpret and to use them. The historians, especially
the economic historians, have a peculiar reason for their intense
interest in this momentous process of transition going on in our
own day. A study of operating social forces in a period of change will
yield not strict parallels, but insights and understandings of those earlier
operations which have left so impermanent a record. One of the many
interesting phenomena which mark such a period as ours, is the realignment
of public opinion. Who could have foretold in 1890 the change
in sentiment which made possible the consolidation provisions of the
Transportation act of 1920? Yet we can find repeated instances in