accepted as a distinct advance upon that one of the older notions
which held that interest was "the reward of abstinence." Much that
was dark and mysterious in credit disappeared when Knies and Sherwood
pointed out that credit is the medium by which we relate the
future to the present. These two are examples of metaphysical studies
based on time. Another example is afforded by the recent investigations
of cycles in economic processes which aim by empirical methods
to discover, in the midst of the bewildering flux and change of time,
some of the periodic recurrences which underly economic processes.
These studies of cycles have been important not only for the fact that
they seem to justify the claim of economics to be a true or forecasting
science, but because they have given a new impulse to the study of
theory and to great improvements in our methods of research. An
exhaustive enumeration of other instances of the advantages of time
studies is not necessary, but mention may be made of the studies of
long and short periods of supply, of the velocity of the circulation of
money, of Moore's and preceding studies of meteorological cycles, of
the statistical studies of the movement of population in the sense of its
increase or diminution, and of the common distinction between time and
place values. Enough has been said, perhaps, to indicate that still
further studies, whether they be metaphysical or empirical, along the
same general lines may possibly be fruitful.

Before passing to the concept of income which I have selected as my
principal illustration I wish to suggest two other fields in which there
may be the possibility of a profitable use of the idea of a law of recurrence.
In certain parts of economic theory, notably the theory of
value, the principle of diminishing or marginal utility has been found
very helpful. It will, I believe, be found even more so if supplemented
by the principle of anticipated recurrence. The principle of diminishing
utility is stated by Professor Alfred Marshall as follows:
There is an endless variety of wants, but there is a limit to each separate
want. This familiar and fundamental tendency of human nature may be
stated in the law of satiable wants or of diminishing utility thus :-The total
utility of a thing to anyone (that is, the total pleasure or other benefit it
yields him) increases with every increase in his stock of it, but not as fast
as his stock increases. If his stock of it increases at a uniform rate the
benefit derived from it increases at a diminishing rate. In other words, the
additional benefit which a person derives from a given increase of his stock
of a thing, diminishes with every increase in the stock that he already has.6
The satiety here predicated is related to or considered as arising
at a given moment or period of time. It rests on what Marshall calls