market-place is as grave a menace to independent thought as the favor
of the throne.

Of these things the American economist stands absolved. Less clear
is the extent to which he held resolute for scientific verity as against
practical compromise. "The function of science is to expose the naked
facts," a recent scholar has declared. "It is for politicians to decide
how to resist developments which are judged to be economically undesirable.
"43 In the economics of war, governmental policy is beset by
two opposed forces. On the one hand is opportunism and practicability:
opportunism in using the stress of war need to accomplish
ends in doubt; practicability in meeting the war strain with least
trouble and resistance. On the other hand is scientific proof and
economic law, rugged and dure, straight and narrow, serving the public
need with measures conceived solely with respect to the social calculus,
and hewing to this line even with struggle in making and difficulty in
carrying out.

Something of our opportunity here was surrendered by prematurity
of pronouncement; something was frittered away by indulgence in
insecure dicta. In the main, however, it is true that the war-time
reserve of the economist proceeded from that ready assent to the
policy and practices of authority which, in time of great national peril,
is the instinct of democracy. At a time when "public opinion could
largely be disregarded because public assent could be assumed," the
economist as alert scientist was submerged in the economist as docile
citizen.

For the post-Armistice period there is a different story to tell. The
war won, the economist regained his poise. Realizing that the doctrine
of practical necessity can do yeoman service in defense of unsound
war-time policies, but that it may not be as securely invoked in the
calmer years that follow; supplied with data before lacking or inaccessible-
he became vigilant and articulate.

Analysis established the clear fact that the United States had
financed the war and its aftermath largely by reliance upon banik credit.
Inflation, theretofore "a high-brow fancy of the professors"-to be
tolerantly ignored by the public, to be summarily dismissed by men
of affairs, and to be held forth bogey-fashion as a warning against
non-adoption of official policies-was exposed as an avoidable evil of
our post-war economy, contributing to high prices, business profiteering,
speculative excesses and social disquiet. The Federal Reserve
Board's belated recourse to higher discount rates in correction of an
overextended credit structure was indicted. The naive assumption of
industrial underproduction-dearly beloved of financial column writers