Economic science has a solid tradition and an arsenal of techniques that
offer a fair measure of objective certainty. As economists we think of our
science developing out of its own inner forces, according to its own laws.
Why then need we concern ourselves particularly with the fact that the social
political economic intellectual world is obviously in a condition of flux
which as historians we should have to recognize as presaging a transition
to a new order?

Is it relevant that the layman expects us to direct our interests and efforts
toward the problems that are presented by the time? We all know, indeed,
that the intelligent public is discontented with the economists. We are
charged with a multitude of sins, many of which we do cheerfully and
sinfully acknowledge. We are said to disagree on every imaginable point
of doctrine. So we do. We are freemen. Those who wish for agreement
among scholars would best turn to the scholars functioning anemically under
the totalitarian states, where economics is an apology for the will of a
dictator, usually an ordinary man of low I.Q., magnified to a million
diameters. We plead guilty to the charge of diversity of opinion. We are
proud to plead guilty.

But there is another charge brought against us for which our defense is
not so adequate. It is the charge that we spend too much time in ivory towers
-vegetable ivory, to be sure, made by du Pont-and too little time out in
the rough and tumble of real life. We are credited with the ability to apply
reason to the problems that are breaking the back of the average good
citizen, but we appear to lack the public spirit that would prompt -us to
exercise that ability.

Imagine that we were living in a time of geologic cataclysm, and the
vast Eurasian continent, from Kamchatka to Gibraltar were cleft in twain,
exposing the geologic formations down to the hot Plutonic base, what
could we expect of the geologists? That they would add footnotes and
appendices to their standard texts, or that they would go out with hammer
and chisel, and report: "Such and such is the actual architecture of the