condemnation of the side which interrupts a public service makes the
strike a boomerang. In these industries accordingly trade unions
operating along old lines are losing much of their usefulness, while the
field open to company unions is broadening. As regards the public
interest in the development of better all-round workers and citizens,
preference must be given to trade unions or company unions depending
upon the type of employer involved. The hope of the future is that
the employer actuated by good will and desiring to make the employment
relation a real copartnership in industry will become the predominant
type, and that under his leadership practicable plans will
be devised for combining national unions dealing with the problems of
general concern to all wage-earners in the industry with company
unions or shop committees for the settlement of local problems.
There is one aspect of the situation which this analysis seems to
overlook. Consciousness of the opposition of interests between employers
and employees has given vitality to the trade union, but an
even stronger cohesive influence has been the consciousness of common
interests that is causing the workers of all countries to unite even
across national boundaries. Is this growing sense of solidarity to be
eclipsed by the increasing realization fostered by company unions that
employers and employees have common interests as well as conflicting
interests? Nothing is further from my own expectation. What I
think rather is that the sense of commton interests which holds wageearners
together in trade unions will be in part transferred from the
industrial to the political field. The principal circumstance that may
render the trade union less indispensable is not any over-night conversion
of employers, but the taking over of the regulation of working
conditions in public service industries by the government. In the constitution
of adjustment boards, in the formulation of legal standards
as to working conditions, in the progressive development of social
insurance and other protective labor legislation, wage-earners will have
an ever increasing motive for concerning themselves with politics. The
United States has been relatively backward in this development but
what has happened in other English speaking countries, in the United
Kingdom, in Australia and in New Zealand, the growth of a labor party
until it has become the principal opposition party, is prophetic of what
is likely to happen here.

There is no danger that the consciousness of solidarity of interest
among wage-earners will grow weaker so long as the wage system
itself endures. What we must hope for from the changes which I have
forecast in connection with our public service industries, and this is
my last word, is that this consciousness of solidarity may be tempered
by a growing realization of our common interest in having these industries
really dominated by the motive of public service, rather than