in the increase of the commnron product but for the imiprovement
of their own condition regardless of or even at the expense
of such increase, for wlhiclh they feel no sense of responsibility.
Where harmony and cooperation are essential for production,
dislharmony and conflict prevail, a conflict which, with the
growing complexity of our industrial inechanism and the growing
strength of labor organizations, threatens the stability of our
whole economic system.
To state the case is to suggest the remedy. Laborers Imlust be
incorporated into the industrial scheme. They miust be given the
voice and responsibility in management, and the hope of reward
for successful effort, which they have h:itherto lacked. Harmony
between men engaged in a conmmon enterprise depends upon personal
contact and conference with full knowledge of the facts by
all concerned, a willingness to sacrifice momentary personal advantage
to the promotion of the common interest anid to submit
to discipline. Interest and a feeling of responsibility exist only
with a sense of power, of having a voice in the determination of
the methiods employed to bring ablout the rc-sult achieved.
These statements may indicate a very inadequate social psychology.
Our social psychlologists can fill out the picture anil
teaclh us the nature of the lhuman instincts with wllich we have to
deal. Our efficiency enigineers can instruct us in the methods of
the organization of work and the adjustmpent of earnings; but
they must study their problem from the point of view not merely
of profits but with consideration of the perinanent well-being and
harmony of interest of all concerned.
This incorporation of laborers must take place first in each industrial
unit. The laborer's sense of responsibility an(d interest,
if it is to be a vital force, must attach itself to tle establislhment
in which he works. There will always remain, however, questions
affecting wlhole branchles of industry whiclh must be settled by conference
between the representatives of the employers anld employees
in the industry as a whole, and questions affecting the relations
between different branches of industry calling for conference
between the representatives of these classes in the nation at large.
We accomplished much in the way of temporary adjustments
along these lines unrder the impulse of the war spirit. The peace
problemn is more difficult, but if our peace spirit is equal to our
war spirit it is not insoluble.
Laborers cannot be expected to give up the advan-tages of organization