proportion of investment in the nineteenth century which could be attributed
(a) to population growth, (b) to the opening up of new territory and the
discovery of new resources, and (c) to technical innovations. Such an analysis
it has not been possible for me to make, and I shall venture only a few
rough estimates together with some qualitative judgments. With respect to
population growth some insight into the problem may perhaps be gained by
considering first the rôle of population growth in the rise of aggregate real
income. The various estimates agree that the annual rate of growth of physical
output up to the World War was roughly three per cent in western
Europe and nearly four per cent in the United States. Of this average annual
increase something less than half of the three per cent increase in western
Europe can be attributed to population growth, while something more than
half of the annual increase in the United States can be assigned to the
increase in the labor supply. Thus it appears that per capita output has increased
both in western Europe and in the United States at approximately
one and one-half per cent per annum. This increase can be attributed mainly
to changes in technique and to the exploitation of new natural resources.
We have already noted that capital formation has progressed at about the
same rate as the rise in aggregate output. Thus, as a first approximation, we
may say that the growth of population in the last half of the nineteenth
century was responsible for about forty per cent of the total volume of capital
formation in western Europe and about sixty per cent of the capital formation
in the United States. If this is even approximately correct, it will be seen
what an important outlet for investment is being closed by reason of the
current rapid decline in population growth.

Obviously the growth of population affects capital formation most directly
in the field of construction, especially residential building. From
decade to decade the increase in the number of dwellings had maintained a
close relation to the increase in population. In the decade of the twenties,
however, the increase in houses ran about twenty-five per cent in excess of
previous decennial increases in relation to population. According to Kuznets,
during the seven prosperous years 1923 to 1929, a quarter of the net capital
formation was residential building. But the effect of population growth on
capital formation is, of course, felt in other spheres as well. This is notably
true of all the various municipal and public utilities, and also of the manufacture
of essential consumers' goods.

An interesting excursus would lead us into a consideration of the problem
how far an increase in population itself contributed to a more efficient
technique and so was in part responsible for the rise in per capita real income.
According to the older Malthusian view, the growth of population
would act counter to the effect of technological progress upon per capita
productivity, and would thus slow down the rise in per capita real income.
If this were correct, population growth considered by itself alone would