4
T. S. Adams
[March
priceless value in the calling of the economist. But they cannot of
themselves produce the broad judgment and wisdom which envisage the
future as well as the past, and which constitute the fruit and flower of
political economy. A political economy which is a mere science is not
enough; partly because it is an impossiblity, partly because there is
something more excellent.
The dominating factor of economic interest in taxation determines
to a large extent the rôle or place of idealism in taxation. Ideals are
effective when they further the economic interest of powerful groups.
The reformers who preached progressive taxation, when the weight of
authoritative economic opinion was against them, have exercised a
powerful practical influence upon the tax systems of the world, and I
have no doubt that they have won, in part because they were right, be-
cause their proposals were sound. But the true explanation of their vic-
tory is found in the fact that they were playing the game of democracy.
On the other hand, the idealists whose ideals ran counter to the
economic interests of the majority, have achieved few positive or visible
results. I recall few personalities in the American field of practical
economics, as powerful and persuasive as Henry George and William
Graham Sumner. If personality and persuasiveness could put over
economic ideals in the field of taxation, the single tax and free trade
would, by this time, be live issues. I pass no verdict upon the validity
of these proposals. Sound or unsound, however, they cut little figure.
They are negligible because they run counter to the interests of the
majority or are, by the majority, supposed to do so. On the other
hand, if land ownership over large areas ever becomes concentrated in
the hands of the few, it is probable that we shall see a vigorous appli-
cation of the single-tax doctrine. If free trade ever accords visibly
with the interest of the majority, who can doubt that we shall move
rapidly in the direction of free trade? But in both cases we shall move,
not because justice or economic "science" beckons in a particular
direction, but because in that direction lies the economic interest of the
majority.
Thrice blessed is the idealist whose honest conviction coincides with
the visible economic interest of the majority. Doubly blessed is he
whose honest conviction coincides with the real but, for the moment,
unrealized economic interest of the majority; he has but to awaken a
sleeping lion. Difficult but stii comfortable is the lot of the idealist,
whose modest task is to keep within due bounds the action of a ma-
jority with the economic interest of which his convictions, in the main,
coincide. But alas for the idealist whose convictions call for a forth-
right and conscious sacrifice of the obvious economic interest of the
majority.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:43:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
