Overwhelmingly significant, but as yet all too little considered by
economists, is the profound change which we are currently undergoing in
the rate of population growth. In the decade of the nineteen-twenties the
population of the United States increased by 16,000,000—an absolute
growth equal to that of the pre-war decade and in excess of any other decade
in our history. In the current decade we are adding only half this num-
ber to our population, and the best forecasts indicate a decline to a third
in the decade which we are about to enter.
Inadequate as the data are, it appears that the prodigious growth of
population in the nineteenth century was something unique in history. Gath-
ering momentum with the progress of modern science and transportation,
the absolute growth in western Europe mounted decade by decade until the
great World War; and in the United States it reached the highest level, as
I have just noted, in the post-war decade. The upward surge began with
relatively small accretions which rapidly swelled into a flood. But the ad-
vancing tide has come to a sudden halt and the accretions are dwindling
toward zero.
Thus, with the prospect of actual contraction confronting us, already we
are in the midst of a drastic decline in the rate of population growth. What-
ever the future decades may bring, this present fact is already upon us; and
it behooves us as economists to take cognizance of the significance of this
revolutionary change in our economic life.
Schooled in the traditions of the Malthusian theory, economists, thinking
in terms of static economics, have typically placed an optimistic interpreta-
tion upon the cessation of population growth. This indeed is also the in-
terpretation suggested by the National Resources Committee which recently
has issued an exhaustive statistical inquiry into current and prospective
changes in population growth. In a fundamental sense this conclusion is, I
think, thoroughly sound; for it can scarcely be questioned that a continued
growth of population at the rate experienced in the nineteenth century
would rapidly present insoluble problems. But it would be an unwarranted
optimism to deny that there are implicit in the current drastic shift from
rapid expansion to cessation of population growth, serious structural malad-
justments which can be avoided or mitigated only if economic policies, ap-
propriate to the changed situation, are applied. Indeed in this shift must be
sought a basic cause of not a few of the developments in our changing
economy.
Adam Smith regarded growth of population as at once a consequence and
a cause of economic progress. Increasing division of labor would, he argued,
bring about greater productivity, and this would furnish an enlarged revenue
and stock, from which would flow an enlarged wages fund, an increased
demand for labor, higher wages, and so economic conditions favorable for
population growth. Now a growing population, by widening the market and