are left available for military purposes, after civilian consumption is
provided for. Governmental outpourings of clipped coin or of paper
money are long-discredited fallacies. But equally also was our vaunted
preparedness in gold reserves for credit expansion a mere preparedness
for inflation. The realities in the situation these influences barely
brush. Easy credit is not easy or plentiful product. New dollars will
not clothe or feed men. More of the dollars is not more ships, cannon,
ammunition, or more men to be spared from industry for the camps
and the firing lines, or for supplying military goods to the embattled
men. As armies march on their stomachs, so wars proceed on some-
thing more substantial than mere necromancy-on a more effective
provisionment than the present shadows of coming things-not on the
present worth of no matter how credible promises, secured never so
well against incomes which as yet are not. Social unrealities a plenty
there are in competitive individual wealth. But the actualities of war
leave no place for intangible assets. True it is that one may sell his
individual wealth and buy bonds. But not all may sell to one another
to the result that all may buy bonds. And even if they could the sup-
plies to be purchased would be no whit the greater.
Our credit devices of war finance, whether wise or unwise by the test
of their total effects, and whether just or unjust by the test of the
ultimate distribution of burdens, were processes that for every strictly
war purpose moved merely upon the surface of things. For a people
like ours that must provision and munition its own war-to say nothing
of financing its associates-the essentials of success lay in the current
productive efficiency of its industry, as supplemented by the most rigor-
ous economy in civilian consumption-the utmost speeding up of the
one, the utmost practicable retardation of the other. The past but
little and the future not at all could serve for the purpose. At the
best, the financial processes were merely devices of guidance and ad-
justment.
Certain other issues become equally clear. The choice of financial
policies lay not between taxes or loans on the one side as over against
credit inflation on the other. It was between taxes and inflation.
Taxes from ultimate income and loans from ultimate income are doubt-
less indistinguishable in certain of their effects. If only the funds are
secured out of ultimate incomes, it need not matter that the scrap of
paper that is a contract one may use as collateral for borrowing and
that the scrap of paper that is a receipt one can not. The bonds that
so readily lend themselves to inflation need not of strict necessity be so
used. The banks might be led to refrain from carrying the paper, or
could have been prohibited, or might have been subjected to such re-