to command, again an educational problem, and one of the greatest
difficulty.

The third phase of the problem, that of securing harmonious
and effective coöperation between the factors which make up the
individual industrial establishment, is, I take it, the constructive
aspect of what we term the labor problem.

The labor problem has in the past been commonly discussed as
a problem of distribution and of the control of the conditions under
which laborers work. The reasons why the problem has assumed
this form are evident. The industrial and legal system
which grew out of the Industrial Revolution place authority and
responsibility in the management of industry, and offer the reward
of success, to the entrepreneur class, closely associated with
the capitalist class. The laborer as a human being is left outside
the industrial scheme. He has neither authority, responsibility,
nor hope of reward beyond his daily wage and the possibility,
open to very few, of escape from his class into the entrepreneur
class. With the rapid increase in the number of laborers made
possible by the increase in aggregate productive power, the increase
in the size of business units, the lack of continuity in employment,
due to the lack of adjustment in our industrial system,
and the necessity of making an immediate sale of his labor power,
the laborer has become as an individual ever more insignificant.
It is inevitable under these conditions that laborers should organize,
not as a constituent element within the system, but for
the purpose of developing a fighting power which shall enable
them to force from the system an increase in the price paid for
their services, a shortening of their hours of labor, and an improvement
in the conditions under which they work.

That good has come from the increase of power which laborers
have secured through organization, that it has forced a more
equitable distribution of income than would otherwise have existed,
that it has improved the conditions under which the masses of
men labor, that it has forced more efficient methods of production
on the employer, and that experience in the work of organization
and negotiation has exercised a valuable educational influence on
the laborer himself cannot be denied.

The fundamental weakness from the point of view of production
has, however, continued to exist. Those who control one of
the essential factors of production remain cutside the system as a
mechanism for the production of wealth, organized not for cooperation