and of transit and equitable treatment for the commerce of all Members
of the League."*

The League's word "equitable" is better in some ways than
President Wilson's word “equality." It does not carry with it so
clear and definite a commitment; but for that very reason it does not
suggest precise limits to the scope of international economic agreements.


In fact, the phrase, “equitable treatment for commerce," suggests
different things to men in different countries. To some it means equal,
that is, general most-favored-nation treatment. Some would add
national treatment in respect of certain matters, such, for example,
as the rights of foreign vessels in national ports, the taxes imposed
upon foreigners, or the protection given them against unfair competition.
To others it includes anti-dumping arrangements, the removal
of restrictions on exports, unrestricted access to raw materials,
or the open door in undeveloped parts of the world. I do not intend
to weary you further by discussing these various possibilities. Just
now the content of international economic agreements is not so important
as it is that agreements should be reached.

I have already said that the more important agreements of this
general sort made before the war were unsuccessful. The difficulty with
them was that they were exceptional arrangements. Belgium in the
Congo and France in Morocco were hampered by restrictions that had
the character of special disabilities, such as had not been attached to
the colonial expansion of other countries. The Brussels Sugar Convention
was an anomaly in a world in which nations were generally left
free to determine their commercial policies as they pleased. To be
really effective, such agreements must establish a general rule, not an
exception to a rule. They must in some way create a new standard
pattern of thought and conduct.

The resolution by which a few months ago the Assembly of the
League of Nations invited the Council of the League to institute
preparations for an international economic conference referred to the
"economic difficulties which stand in the way of the restoration of
general prosperity," and expressed the conviction that "economic
peace will contribute largely to ensuring the security of peoples." As
matters now stand in Europe, these two objects, economic restoration
and economic peace, are closely connected. But of the two, economic
peace is the more important, for it is the condition of the other.
Consider what has already been accomplished toward financial
reconstruction. The real significance of the plans for the financial
***I have given an account of the history of this clause in A History of the Peace
Conference of Paris, edited by H. W. V. Temperley, vol. V, ch. 1, part 3.**