Now it is
well known that you can fill Professor Seager's “healthy American boy"
"to the very top" with hot cakes and maple syrup this morning only
to find that when tomorrow morning arrives he is quite ready for a
repetition. When we observe that the law of satiable wants must be
extended to include the anticipated recurrence of those wants, it be-
comes obvious that the future use of a present stock or surplus comes
into the present reckoning, in a manner not sufficiently explained by
the ordinary reference to discount. To illustrate, with a given stock
of money, we may conclude that none of the various uses to which we
might conceivably put a dollar today is equal to the fun we may have
with it tomorrow. But, furthermore, the fact that we shall need a
dollar tomorrow puts a limit to the diminishing utility that we ascribe
to one today. This may help to an understanding of some of the intri-
cate problems of demand. It is not sufficient, for example, to show by
reference to the supply alone, that a barrel of flour can be sold more
cheaply in bulk than in ten pound lots because it costs less so to do.
It must also be shown why there is any demand at all for it in bulk
even at the lowered price per pound. If it were not for the future or
recurrent uses we would never buy of anything more than enough for
present use. By bringing the law of recurrence into relation to the
law of satiety it seems to me apparent that a more complete, if not a
fully complete, explanation of the demand for quantities in excess of
immediate use is obtained. This all too brief statement may suffice
to suggest one way in which more intensive study of the time element
may throw some additional light on the laws of demand.
May we now raise the second question, which is whether it may not
also be true that a study of the law of recurrence in production will
help to a new understanding or at least a clearer statement of the con-
ditions of supply? It is very generally accepted that one of the great
handicaps under which the human race labors in getting a living is that
law ordinarily referred to as the law of diminishing returns. Many
have already pointed out that this law is not confined, as was at one
time almost universally assumed, to the cultivation of land. Any
agency of production, be it land, machinery, or labor, gives a diminish-
ing return, or costs more to operate, per unit of output, if driven hard
or operated at a speed beyond a certain point. This is illustrated
very nicely by the now-a-days familiar facts as to the operation of a
gas engine in an automobile. Every such engine has a so-called "most
economical rate of speed" of operation. If you start slowly and
gradually speed your car up to the point of most economical operation,
a point fixed by the engineers who built it and in turn dependent upon
the strength of materials, friction, inertia and other physical or natural
laws, you pass at first through a region where there is a decreasing