8
Frederick C. Mills
[March
between
state is not to be doubted. But we can be equally sure that the
gap
objective and attainment will remain, to exasperate, torment and stimulate
us and our successors. Our reach will continue to exceed our grasp, and
economists will still have need of Heaven.
There is yet another factor in our current discomfort. Economics deals,
of course, with human needs. But in a very special sense the things that men
desire amelioration of present troubles, social and economic reconstruc-
tion-touch the everyday work of the economist as they do not touch the
laboratory of the physical scientist. Influences of this sort, relating to ends
and ultimate values, are always felt in our discipline, but they are made to
press more insistently upon us by the difficulties of the day, and by our
present fearful concern with political and social emergencies. Looking
abroad, we have seen the purposes and values of special groups imposed on
scholars, and the resources of science used to buttress party dogmas. At
home, the ideal of objective research has been questioned. With freedom of
thought forcibly denied to our co-workers abroad, with doubt expressed
in our own circles as to the possibility and the desirability of scientific
detachment, and with the urgencies of the day beating upon us, we may not
put these issues aside.
The ideal of an objective science of economics, built on steadily expand-
ing knowledge of human nature, of social institutions and of industrial
organization, and divorced from personal judgments of the desirable and
the undesirable, has made its way slowly. For economics was long tied to
ethical creeds and conditioned by moral judgments. The escape to ob-
jectivity was difficult, more difficult than for the physical sciences. The
subject matter of economics is the behavior of human beings; its laws deal
with human wants, and the pains of effort. It is not easy to disentangle
these intimately human affairs from personal judgments and individual
scales of value.
It has seemed obvious to men of many generations that the ends of human
existence and the objectives of social action are simple and inevitable truths.
Whether the end so clear to men was to glorify a deity, to achieve the simple
and natural order of liberty, to maximize the good of the greatest number,
to aggrandize a nation, or to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat,
norms for judgment of the "rightness" or "wrongness" of conditions or
policies were ready to hand. The notion that one could thus simply and
finally judge ends and appraise means sharply limited the scope of social
thinking. Confidence in a fixed system of ultimate values restricted the
hypotheses open to study, and cramped the investigator in the exploration
of social forms.
I do not attempt to trace the growth of the ideal of an objective science
of economics, independent of ethical creeds and moral philosophy. There
are elements of it in eighteenth-century thought, entangled with Physio-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:52:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
