That also the socialist wants these ameliorations because he is
a socialist, leaves it none the less true that he wants them. So far
we may work together. Because I desire equality in competition, I
want to be rid of property in privilege, in tolls, in restrictions of output,
in nostrums, in every ill good-will. With whomsoever also wants
to be rid of them I am glad to make common cause. I want a fair and
intelligent and adequate trial of the possibilities of competition for
human welfare, before the question of its abandonment for unknown
things is to attain the dignity of a present issue. Thus with another
man who takes these methods of amelioration of the existing order as
merely steps toward getting altogether rid of it, I have no present
quarrel. That he wants to improve it is enough for me, no matter what
may be his ultimate end. I also want to improve it-to the ultimate
end of preserving it. So improved, I hold it likely better to serve the
ends of human life than any new thing that he can offer as substitute
for it. My mistake? It may be. We shall see about it then. Meanwhile
now he is welcome to his own line of prophecy, as later, in its due
and appropriate time, he will be welcome to his own line of effort, divergent
from mine.

And now I arrive at positions perhaps more controversial. The society
to which as working ideal I pin my faith is a consistently democratic
society, a society of competitive equality; not, however, a society
of economic equality, so far as individual powers and accomplishment
must and will differ, but of inequality limited solely to differences
in individual ability and achievement; a society free of differentials of
privilege or of inherited opportunity; a society in which men may be
unequal solely by the title of individual gifts and accomplishment, but
equal still in all their objective conditions; a society of equality only
in the sense of equality of opportunity, where it can be only in the subjective
sense, never in the objective, that a man have no chance, that
he arrive in the world not less obviously damned into it than born into
it. And this means that a competitive society progressively stratifying
through the passing down from one generation to another of the differentials
inevitably emerging in each generation, I hold to be a society
that by the test both of its worth and of its promise of endurance
is grievously sick.

This credo, I admit, or that part of it that sounds in the ethical
emphasis, makes a not much better claim to validity than may attach
to any mere act of faith. Such with me in point of derivation it doubtless
was. I offer now no support of it; though, as ex post facto to its
getting, I think I have come into some reasons for holding it-considerations
of the aggregate serviceability of income, of competitive