The
American Economic Review
Vol. XXVI
MARCH, 1936
No. 1
PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND PRESENT PROSPECTS
OF AMERICAN ECONOMICS
Presidential address delivered at the Forty-eighth Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, New York City, December 27, 1935.
The present state of American economics gives ground for both congratulation and
humility. A revival occurred after the Civil War, reoriented by the founders of the Amer-
ican Economic Association. Though leaning at first toward the historical method, the first
great result was an indigenous growth of systematic economics of marginal equilibrium.
The marginal method, possibly our greatest single tool of analysis, is not limited to theories
of equilibrium, which are themselves tools of analysis, not finished pictures of the economic
world.
The critical movement which followed did not wipe out the marginal economics, the
best test being the continued use and development of its concepts, though often in modified
form, by those now engaged in positive studies. For example, the theory of imperfect
competition has required a more accurate statement than before of the conditions necessary
to perfect competition, in order to show how different conditions lead to different results.
In the present crisis, a few economists have helped shape policy, many have rendered
good service in subordinate positions, but economics as a whole has not furnished authori-
tative guidance, owing largely to the inherent limitations of scientific method in dealing
with practical issues in this field. We are entering a new epoch in the relation of govern-
ment to industry, raising the question whether the extension of control is passing the limits
within which gradual change is possible. The economist will naturally tend to give
evolutionary change the benefit of every doubt, and to hold that it may yet succeed. While
the ultimate answer to this and many other questions rests with trial-and-error experimen-
tation, economic analysis can still contribute much, and there are many problems which
challenge it. The most important thing is to maintain free scientific inquiry.
This is a time for reviewing fifty years of accomplishment in our science;
and much accomplishment there has been, in which we may well take pride.
But while this is fitting and proper, we shall not do well to dwell too much
on the mood of self-congratulation. For this is also a time for rather deep
humility and searching examination of our results, our methods and our
standards. We know much more than we did fifty years ago, but in another
sense there is much less of which we are certain. And it remains true that in
a time of desperate need economics has not furnished the unified and au-
thoritative guidance which many have thought, rightly or wrongly, that they
had a right to expect. The story I must try to tell is an unfinished one, and
there is no guarantee of a happy ending.
A Review of Fifty Years: The Starting-Point
"Speaking generally, . . . the men best qualified to stand in the front rank
of American Economists are not the authors of systems or general theories, or
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:50:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
