and transportation. Even in the greatest period of trade-union ex-
pansion from 1915 to 1920 when nearly 2.5 million members were added,
an insignificant part of this increase came from occupations outside the
old field. It was an intensive cultivation of an already occupied area.
If American trade unionism had retained in 1930 its control of the
fields in which it has successfully operated, it could have shown only a
small increase over 1920. That trade unionism has not been able to
expand into trade, clerical occupations, domestic and professional serv-
ice is no more a problem now than it was in 1910 or in 1920. The
reasons, or at any rate part of the reasons, are closely connected with
the relation between employer and employee and the size of the business
unit. Where in these occupational divisions the situation approximates
that in manufacturing, as for example, in the theaters, trade unionism
has shown vitality; but the number of such situations has been and re-
mains small.
But the failure of American trade unionism to increase its member-
ship during the period under consideration is not due solely to the
shifts in occupational groups which have occurred. Within the field
traditionally covered by trade-union organization, changes have taken.
place which have operated powerfully against the advance of trade union-
ism. In 1930, in the three fields-minerals, manufacturing and mechani-
cal, and transportation and communication—there were employed nearly
19 million persons as against 17 millions in 1920. These great occupa-
tional divisions cannot be regarded, however, as homogeneous; and it is
necessary to break them down into smaller categories if an understand-
ing of what has happened is to be had.
The field of manufacturing and mechanical occupations includes two
radically distinct kinds of occupations-the building trades and the
manufacturing trades. The history of these two from 1924 to 1930
was entirely different and throws light on our problem. The number of
persons engaged in the building industry cannot be exactly ascertained
from the census, but such evidence as there is points to an increase in
the decade of probably 10 per cent in these occupations. The building
trades unions increased their membership from 845,000 in 1924 to
952,700 in 1930, an increase certainly fully proportionate to the gain
in the persons employed in these occupations. In 1930 the membership
in the building trades was 25 per cent of the total membership of
American trade unions, while in the year 1922 it was slightly over 20
per cent. In 1930, the building trades membership was a larger per-
centage of the total membership than at any previous period. There
was not in 1930 any diminution in the power of the building trades
unions.
The strength of trade unionism in the other group of occupations