1921]
The Post-War Outlook
9
An exterior loan
to wear than the skin of a bear not yet killed.”
merely places a warring nation in control of exterior current products,
through the promise of a later and offsetting return of the products
of a later time. Domestic loans control only domestic goods of cur-
rent supply. Like taxes, loans distribute purchasing power over cur-
rent goods in favor of the government; but, unlike taxes, they provide
for a later redistribution of the goods that the future will produce.
Loans and taxes differ not at all in point of the current national re-
sources out of which the support of the war must be provided. The
differences attach solely to later accountings of principal and interest
to creditors, creditors who might instead have been taxpayers. Equal-
ly, whether by loans or taxes, subtractions from current individual in-
comes there must inevitably be, so far as war is to be supported at
all. Whoever can buy bonds can pay taxes. The taxes terminate in
slips of paper that are receipts, the loans provide slips of paper that
are the beginnings of other things-contractual slips of paper, promis-
ing redistributions of future incomes and secured by first liens against
these future incomes. But the future incomes do not thereby become
presently available for present needs. The bonds induce the voluntary
grant of present income. Taxes get the same results coercively out of
the same resources of present goods. Distinctions of equity, tactical
expediency, administrative complexity, class pressure, and general in-
telligibility are another matter. Doubtless the opposition to war is
less if profits to many and costs to none are in general expectation.
Equally, for the most part, is war support impossible out of wealth
remaining over from the past. Most of it-houses, lands, factories,
equipment, furniture is unavailable for present consumption either
civilian or military; it is goods serving as intermediates toward pro-
duct but themselves not final products for consumption. Stored up
war supplies munitions, equipment, war bread-are doubtless possible,
but only in relatively meager volumes. Something also is possible, so
far as deterioration can practically be carried, in making past produc-
tion directly tributary to present emergencies. So again, goods for
civilian consumption may not merely be economized-consumption re-
stricted but can be worn out without current replacement, whereby
productive forces may be so far set free for military purposes. But
the sum of all of these levies on the past bulks small in relation to the
total war requirement. In the large it still holds true that present war,
like present peace, must pay its way as it goes.
The irrelevancy of bullion supplies, of banking reserves, and of facili-
ties for currency expansion-or the worse than irrelevancy is thus
evident, so far as the fundamentals of war finance are concerned. Wars
are questions of those margins of productive energy and output that
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:35:53 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
