monopolies are in control of resources which are the exclusive possession
of the country in question, and have sought to limit the production or
export of the monopolized commodities. In such cases the government
is either sharing in the ownership and control of the monopoly, or is
endeavoring to obtain revenues by taxation of its profits. Such seems
to have been the situation in the Chilean nitrate and iodine export trade,
in the German potash industry and in the case of the Japanese camphor
monopoly. Similar controls by government, exercised perhaps for more
pardonable reasons but with less satisfactory results, have taken place
in the marketing of Brazilian coffee and crude rubber from British
colonial plantations. But the likelihood of a failure in the case of a
government monopoly which is dependent upon the international market
is much greater than in the case of that of a private corporation. Both
private and government monopolies run the risk of stimulating the search
for substitutes for the monopolized commodity; but a government
monopoly which undertakes to favor domestic producers over foreign
purchasers is bound to create resentment on the part of other governments.
In such case the threat of retaliation is often sufficient to prevent
unfair discriminations or unreasonably high prices.
Students of international affairs are for the most part agreed that
the present-day struggle between nations to secure or retain control
over such commodities as petroleum, rubber, copper and certain other
minerals is more likely to lead to international conflict than are national
efforts to secure markets for manufactured goods. If the chances of
war are to be reduced to a minimum, it is evident that some plan must
be devised whereby the world's supplies of these present-day necessities.
can be made available to those producers who can make the best use of
them.

Of the nations which have been most insistent in their efforts to have
established a free world market for the purchase of the raw materials
for manufacture, one is Italy, which has very few of such resources.
Another is the United States, which possesses an abundance of many of
the most important minerals and basic materials for manufactures but
which is, nevertheless, dependent on outside sources for such things as
rubber, long-staple cotton, manganese, nickel, chromium, tin ore, raw
silk, pulp wood, sisal and potash, all of which are either not produced
at all in this country or in quantities insufficient to meet the needs of our
manufactures. The plea for an open market for raw materials may
seem, therefore, to be peculiarly an American one. Certain foreign nations
which have been restricting the export of raw materials found
within their dominions have not hesitated to call attention to the apparent
inconsistency of the American demand for a free market in which
to purchase supplies with our insistence that our own market must be