of citizens generally and of the group as an organic whole.
This socially correct system of incomes being assumed, it necessarily follows
that the judgments reached by citizens with respect to the relative
importances of different commodities would be virtually social judgments,
and the resulting commodity prices would be prices which expressed
the social importances of commodities.

A third specific provision which is assumed to be present in the socialist
plan for determining what commodities to produce is this: In
deciding whether or not to demand the production of a particular commodity,
the citizen must have before his mind just what price he would
be obliged to pay for that commodity. Such a provision would be indispensable,
since the citizen would not be able to reach a decision as
to whether or not he wanted to buy a given commodity, unless he had
before him the data necessary for comparing the desirability of said
commodity with the drain on his income which the buying of that commodity
would involve.

The last specific provision of the correct socialist plan for dealing
with our problem would be this: In fixing the selling price of any particular
commodity, the economic authorities would set that price at a
point which fully covered the cost of producing said commodity, and
those authorities would understand the cost of producing that commodity
to be the drain on the economic resources of the communityits
stock or income of primary factors-consequent upon producing
said commodity.

As the particular procedure brought out in the last sentence plays an
essential part in making the plan for guiding production advocated in
this paper the right plan, I must add here two or three comments.
First, by the phrase "primary factors" is meant those economic factors
of production behind which the economist does not attempt to go, for
example, the land itself; the water powers; the original raw materials
such as metallic ores; the different kinds of labor services, etc.
Again, by the phrase "effective importance" I mean the degree of
importance which is a resultant of the whole situation, particularly of
the generic importance of the factor in question and the quantity of it
available. Put in another way, the effective importance of anything is
that degree of importance which we should take into account in deciding
how to act. Thus, a man sitting beside a flowing well has no occasion
to economize in the use of water; and so in this situation water
to him has no effective importance. To the same man, however, if temporarily
lost in the desert with his whole stock of water reduced to a
single quart, the utmost possible economy in the use of water would be
imperative; and the effective importance of his stock of water would be
beyond estimate.
