Main Street into Broadway. These men were ready to make sacrifices
to establish schools and churches and to set up the symbols of a
higher culture. The democratic co-educational state university, a typically
western institution, was devised by the pioneers as an answer to
the demand for opportunities for general higher education. Thus the
frontier of learning closely followed, and was all but coterminous with,
the physical frontiers of settlement and material success. Its conquest
was marked by the establishment of schools and colleges, of libraries,
art museums,

and conservatories of music, beautiful homes and wellplanned
cities, all of which may be accepted as manifestations of civilization.


Human advance is never even along all lines; it moves more rapidly
in certain directions and more slowly in others. In some aspects progress
consists in conquering nature, in appropriating her fruits, and in harnessing
natural forces to our needs; but in other aspects it means adaptation
to the environment. The westward movement partook of both. The
need of the times was on the whole for men of action, and for the tasks
to be performed strong men were bred. At other times in the world's
history, other needs and ideals have been paramount, and society has
responded in kind. In the twelfth century man wished to be a crusader;
in the sixteenth a buccaneer; in the eighteenth an empire builder; in the
nineteenth an industrial leader; and in the twentieth a scientist.
Although we have in 300 years pushed back somewhat the frontiers
of agriculture and industry, of culture and learning, we have only comparatively
recently essayed the task of scientific adventuring. And in
spite of splendid achievements in the fields of the physical and biological
sciences, we have probably if the picture of our westward movement
may be applied scarcely done more than cross the Appalachian Mountains.
If we consult the leaders in these sciences, we learn indeed of
significant discoveries and great progress, but also of major problems
still awaiting solution. Let me submit a few random samples from some
of the important sciences.

It is a trite observation to remark that our present industrial advance
has been due primarily to technological improvements, and that
society today depends as never before upon the application of science
to industry. Anyone who has attempted to follow the recent epoch-making
contributions, especially of the physical sciences, cannot but be
deeply impressed by the enormous range and advance of scientific invention
and discovery within the last five decades. When Bell and Edison,
the Wright brothers, Pupin and Millikan first looked out upon
the field of scientific endeavor it must have seemed to them that they
stood on the verge of the frontier. But owing to the work of these and
other men that border has been steadily extended. The heavens have