as instruments by which a state's power could be projected across its
own boundaries.
Such a system must often have undesirable economic effects. The
present tariffs of some of the new states of eastern Europe afford an
illustration. These tariffs are much higher than the real economic
interests of those states demand. Artificial barriers set up at new
boundary lines, these new tariffs block long-established channels of
trade and hinder the economic recovery of that part of the world.
Not all the blame can be put upon the newly stimulated spirit of
nationalism. For these are bargaining tariffs. Some of the highest
duties are imposed, not upon goods which the tariff-making country
particularly desires to keep out, but upon goods which another country
desires to get in. Aimed largely at one another, these new tariffs are
an example of the wasteful futility of this method of procedure.
Commercial treaties, coupled with most-favored-nation provisions, will
gradually reduce them, but in the meanwhile the costs are heavy. And
experience has shown, I think, that tariffs made in this way generally
have an upward trend. New vantage points are sought from time to
time; special industrial interests look upon the reductions made in
treaties as ground regrettably lost; national sentiment, also, learns to
look upon concessions as retreat, so that there is a cumulative pressure
upward.
The United States has stood aloof from this system. We have held,
though not with complete consistency, to the policy of the equal treat-
ment of the commerce of all other nations. But the Tariff act of 1922
empowers the President to impose retaliatory duties upon imports
from any country which discriminates against our commerce; and the
same general principle was embodied in the Tariff act of 1909. We
determine the other country's guilt; and we impose what we consider
an appropriate penalty-surely an unsatisfactory way of handling the
matter.
Students of these problems have become pretty well convinced, I
think, that the most important single step toward their solution lies
in the adoption of multilateral conventions defining the conditions of
economic intercourse among the nations of the world. The first
principle, the irreducible minimum, in such agreements is the doing
away with a nation's power to discriminate against the trade of any
other nation. This was the meaning of the third of President Wilson's
Fourteen Points: "The removal, so far as possible, of all economic
barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade conditions."
This, beyond doubt, is part of the meaning of the clause in the Covenant
of the League of Nations which binds the signers of that covenant to
**"make provision to secure and maintain freedom of communications**