1938]
Recovery Problem in United States
7
however, anticipate that the miscellaneous demand for capital together with
that of the utility companies and the railroads will be sufficient to absorb
for an indefinite period all available funds and fully employ the capital-
goods industries. There is, however, one obvious product for which there
is an elastic demand of vast proportions. I refer, of course, to better
shelter for the mass of people in the United States. Were this provided,
it would further induce a large subsequent demand for appropriate house
furnishings of many kinds. Hitherto efforts to meet this demand have
been limited almost entirely to measures directed toward reducing the
costs of financing and modernizing financial arrangements. They alone
have not proved effective and it mayhap be questioned whether a reduction
in the price of building materials, even if accompanied by some increase
in efficiency in building labor and reduction in building wage rates, would
be sufficient to secure the maximum of improvement in shelter which is
feasible. In addition, we need the creation of business organizations pro-
ducing shelter on a large scale, both for sale and for rent. This is essential
because there are many costs involved in the production of shelter in
addition to the costs of materials and labor directly employed and the
financial costs. Business organizations for building and servicing low-cost
houses have not been developed in this country to an extent comparable
to that in many other countries. Because of this lack of organization, we
cannot expect rapid expansion in this field. It does, however, clearly afford
the most promising opportunity for the investment of capital in the future
with a resultant improvement in the standard of living of estimable value.
That an elastic demand for better shelter exists cannot be doubted. To
meet this demand, business organization, as well as low material prices,
efficient labor and adequate finance are needed.
Harvard University
O. M. W. SPRAGUE
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:51:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
