The
American Economic Review
VOL. XVI
MARCH, 1926
ECONOMICS AND WAR
No 1.
Presidential address delivered at the Thirty-eighth Annual Meeting of the
American Economic Association, held in New York, December 28-31, 1925.
"Peace is the natural effect of trade," said Montesquieu.' Not is,
but should be, said Adam Smith. "Commerce, which ought naturally.
to be among nations as among individuals, a bond of union and friend-
ship, has become the most fertile source of discord and animosity.”
More than a century later one of the wisest of historians reaffirmed
the Scotch economist's verdict. "It is not true that the development
of material interests promotes peace.
Commerce, as the messenger of
peace, is a mythological character. In its origin it was brigandage;
in ancient, mediaeval, and modern times it occasioned wars. Men
fought on the Baltic for herring, and on all the seas for spices. In
our day the growth of industry creates the question of foreign markets,
which, in turn, brings the interests of the states into conflict.
mercial rivalry and rancor thus strengthen national hatred."
Com-
In what measure is this a true finding? In what measure must it
remain true? These are the questions I propose to discuss. They are
difficult questions, and the literature of economics throws surprisingly
little light upon them. There appear to be two general classes or
types of opinions, and little else beside.
One view which may be called the popular or naive view, and which
has had, I believe, few adherents among economists of standing-sees
in war one of the normal, or even one of the rational, economic activities
of men. National groups are pictured as behaving like the economic man
of our methodological mythologies, each consistently and relentlessly
seeking its own interests. The interests of different groups clash,
conflicts arise, and conflicts grow into war.
In one way or another this view is persistently thrust before us.
We encounter it in our newspapers, where it serves as one of the
useful stock scenarios into which even the ordinary humdrum incidents
of economic and political intercourse among nations are fitted, and
'Esprit des Lois, Book XX, ch. 2.
"Wealth of Nations, Book IV, ch. 3.
3E. Lavisse, General View of the Political History of Europe (transl. C. Gross),
p. 163.