1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
3
be a permanent decrease of production or the abandonment of all
attempt by the world at large to escape from a depreciated paper
basis, the error of the economists of 1914 will prove to be in the
time required for fundamental economic forces to work out their
result and not in the ultimate result itself. The influences which
retard the fall in prices are the same influences which retard the
rise of interest rates. When these influences are exhausted and the
fall in prices occurs, it may also be found that what we might
term the real interest rates, the burden imposed upon the borrower,
the per cent on value actually received which he has contracted
to repay, have risen more rapidly than nominal rates.
In the face of what I have said concerning the danger of pro-
phecy, and of what seems to be the tendency of events at the mo-
ment, I will venture one more prediction strictly in accord with
the current theory of economics. As a result of the war the
United States has changed from a debtor to a creditor nation
and bids fair to again take its place in the ocean carrying trade.
For nearly fifty years we have had a so-called favorable balance of
trade which has been tremendously increased by the war.
The permanent as distinguished from the temporary influences
set in operation by the war are working, however, towards an in-
crease of imports relatively to exports. We cannot expect per-
manently to maintain the great excess of exports over imports
which has characterized our commerce since 1873. This read-
justment of our trade balance may be temporarily modified and
postponed by continued grants of foreign credits, by investments
in foreign securities, and large expenditures by American travel-
lers abroad. It is bound to come in the end. I make no predictions
as to the time involved.
But if the war has made clear that economic science has not
yet reached a stage of completeness which affords a secure basis
for prophecy, so far at least as the time required for its fulfilment
is concerned, it has without question confirmed the truth of cer-
tain fundamental facts and principles which lie at the basis of the
current teaching of economics. Nothing could have brought out
more clearly than did the war the truth, taught in every class in
elementary economics, that the fundamental economic facts and
processes are the same under our highly organized industrial sys-
tem as in the most primitive community, that the measure of man's
economic power is his ability to produce the goods which he needs,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
