The
American Economic Review
VOL. XXI
MARCH, 1931
No. 1
ECONOMIC CONFLICT AS A REGULATING FORCE IN INTER-
NATIONAL AFFAIRS
Presidential address delivered at Forty-third Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, Cleveland, Ohio, December 30, 1930.
Economic conflict of the milder form known as competition was relied upon by
the older economists as a sufficient means of social control. Experience has shown
that this conclusion was too optimistic but that economic conflict is likely to be
less destructive to social relations than are conflicts of a political, ecclesiastical
or racial character. At times economic conflicts may be made to serve as substitutes
for conflicts of a more dangerous sort.
In international affairs economic conflict, if unhampered by attempts at political
control, will likely result in compromises which will obviate military conflicts. The
big business and financial leaders of today have learned that war is not to their
advantage.
International capitalistic combinations offer a more effective means of controlling
the exploitation of limited natural resources than do government controls and are
less likely to lead to war. Therefore governmental interference with the inter-
national flow of capital is seldom desirable. The policy of laissez faire found its
earliest application in the field of international trade and is, still, most easily justified
in that sphere of action.
To the economist conflict is neither a new nor a strange phenomenon.
Very early in human history man learned that he could eat bread only
by the sweat of his face, and the lesson thus learned was rephrased by
the early economists into the doctrine that labor is the price of all eco-
nomic goods.
Man's first struggle was with the earth itself which grudgingly yielded
him a living; but this earthy contact gave him like Antaeus new strength
for the conflict. Man soon discovered, however, that his was not the only
species which depended for its existence upon the produce of the soil.
Only by an unceasing struggle with other forms of animal life could
human beings obtain a portion of the food and other resources which
nature dispensed impartially but with a sparing hand. So strenuous and
persistent has been this struggle for survival between man and other
organisms that a prominent entomologist has only recently declared that
it is still uncertain whether in the contest between the human and the
insect species it will be man who will survive.
Somewhere in the age-long struggle man discovered that conflict need
not always end in the destruction of the defeated party. His own
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:45:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
