1935]
The Union in Industry
9
tant attitude accompanying a strong feeling of solidarity. Limitations may
be placed directly or indirectly upon individual output. In the union shop
helpers may be forced out, the number of apprentices limited, and restric-
tions placed upon the subdivision of work or upon the introduction of new
machinery and of more economical processes.
Thus the differences between union and non-union shops and also be-
tween one unionized shop and another are such as to make any conclusions
as to labor costs based upon a comparison of wage rates quite insecure. Con-
crete situations differ widely. In one extreme case as a result of union coöper-
ation in introducing piece work, reducing the turnover of labor, and main-
taining discipline, the wage advances were more than offset and the labor
cost of manufacturing a suit of clothes reduced approximately ten per cent,
though the earnings of the workers more than doubled. In other known
cases the labor cost increased more than would be indicated by the in-
creases in wages and reductions in hours. But most frequently an increase
in wages on a time basis and almost always an increase in wages on a piece
basis means an increase in labor cost. Such must be the conclusion of the
student whose investigations of concrete cases are of necessity limited to
the short run. Perhaps the long-run effects might differ somewhat because
of the favorable effect of higher wages on efficiency.
Turning to the question of total cost, it may be that with labor made
more expensive, less of it and more of capital will be employed, total costs
not being increased as much as the labor costs would have been. In this
case the amount of employment in the industry is reduced. Higher wages
are then at the expense of employment. On the other hand, with low wages
eliminated, management may be "tightened up." If it is not, a firm may
go to the wall and production be concentrated in the more efficient plants.
But the mortality of firms with unionization is not so great as one might
expect, for in the real world necessity is frequently the mother of invention.
Most economists see only the lure of profit; necessity of remaining in and
playing the game is important. Low wages and long hours often have been
a tax, higher wages and shorter hours a premium, upon efficiency of organ-
ization and management.
Thus only the most intensive investigation would establish the relation
between wages increased by union pressure and labor cost and total cost of
production or of providing a service. And certainly such investigation would
yield diverse results. Nevertheless, it is true that unionization most frequent-
ly means some increase in labor costs and in total costs as well, and some-
times the increase is a relatively large one.
When and where this is true, the question arises, who loses what organ-
ized labor gains in wages and working conditions? Do higher costs spell
higher prices paid by consumers of the product, whether they be rich or
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:56:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
