known to the empirics.' But it remains certain that the economist's
grasp of the immediate subject-matter, his acquaintance with compar-
able experience, his mental habit in social valuation give him distinctive
equipment for the formative service which was denied him.
Divested of the opportunity to shape economic policies-partly
through his own inertia, partly through political neglect-the rôle
of the political economist becomes that of a constructive critic. Reso-
lute against the negative quibbling of the embittered faultfinder,
watchful against the soporific emanations of the throne-his mission
must be fearless, unequivocal assertion of the verities of his science, as
against the prejudice of the moment, the pressure of class interest, or
the quietism of office.
He must seek, increasingly, to lay bare the mistakes that have been.
made and impute them to the proper source, whether of practices or of
persons this in no vindictive sense but in order that there may be a
strict assignment of responsibility, to the end of abandoning unsound
practices, of devising appropriate remedial measures and of avoiding
like pitfalls in the future.
The finest traditions of his past enjoin this: It is the call of Adam
Smith, inveighing in behalf of freedom of trade against "the clamorous
importunity of partial interests." It is the summons of Malthus
denouncing the poor laws of England as a set "of grating, inconvenient
and tyrannical laws." It is the insistence of Ricardo, protesting
against the misuse of the sinking fund. It is the acridity of John
Stuart Mill, in condemnation of the inflationist proposals of the Bir-
mingham currency school.
In this sense, the restraint of the American economist in the war
period is not exhilarating: a record of substantial practical service
in many directions, rendered with fidelity, devotion and efficiency, but
service essentially contributory and acquiescent. Of that resolute
intractibility against scientific error, uncompromising and outspoken,
which must distinguish the economist as sentinel and critic—there is
in the period of actual belligerency little evidence.
This involves no charge of intellectual cowardice." In the cynicism
of world collapse, George Brandes has lately revived an epigram im-
puted to Frederick the Great: "I begin by taking. Then I always
find men of science to prove the justice of my claim." The possibility
is peculiar neither to time nor place. There is danger of scholarship
becoming official in a democracy no less than in an absolutism. Public
passion cracks as sharp a whip as any despot, and the applause of the
4¹Ibid., p. 194.
42Cf. the present writer's "Do Government Loans Cause Inflation?" in Annals
(Philadelphia), January, 1918.