of strikes or other concerted efforts to interrupt the service. I base
this opinion on two grounds. In the first place the strike weapon in
these industries is beginning to be a boomerang. The very fact that
continuous operation of public service industries is vital to the public
interest insures in advance public condemnation of the group which
undertakes to interrupt such operation, however great the provocation.
For that reason the shopmen's strike of last summer was lost
before it was begun. The same circumstance foredooms a street railway
strike, under any but the most unusual conditions, to failure.
The managers of our railroads and street railway companies are
beginning to understand the situation. Few of them doubt their ability
to break, with the aid of indignant public opinion, any strike that
may be started provided the government prevents violence and intimidation
on the part of the strikers.

My second and stronger reason for believing that we shall persist
in the policies of adjusting labor conditions in public service industries
through boards or courts and prohibiting strikes is that we have
already pressed the policy of regulating rates and quality of service
so far that we cannot well avoid similarly regulating wages. Public
authority cannot long content itself with prescribing that "rates shall
be fair and reasonable" without also prescribing that costs, including
wages, shall be fair and reasonable.

The background against which we must consider the advantages and
disadvantages of company unions versus trade unions in public service
industries is then a situation in which the strike is already a discredited
and is rapidly becoming a futile weapon, in which boards and courts
are being established and strengthened to adjudicate labor disputes,
in which definite standards as to hours, wages, and working conditions
are being crystallized into law, and in which to an increasing extent
the law will also prohibit and punish combined action aiming at
interruption of the operation of these industries."
We are now ready to ask what are the tests of a desirable form of
labor organization from the viewpoint of the public, of the employees
concerned and of the employers. From the viewpoint of the public the
ends to be advanced are continuous operation, economy and efficiency
in operation and the development of more intelligent, more capable and
**"I do not advocate this last step, logical and necessary as I believe it to be, because
I feel strongly that any statute which deprives the employees of public service
industries of their right to strike, must in fairness establish definite minimum
standards for their protection. Among these should be, in my opinion, the eighthour
day with extra compensation for overtime, a reasonable living wage, employment
on a monthly or even annual, instead of merely a daily, basis and the right
to belong to labor organizations of their own choosing. Economists can, I think,
render a more valuable service by urging the need of such standards than in
joining in the current hue and cry against strikes.**