consistently make the selling price of the sewing machine smaller than
its resources-cost of thirty dollars; since doing so would in effect in-
crease the income of the citizen interested, though, by hypothesis, that
income was already just what it ought to be.
II
In the preceding discussion, we have completed our main task, that is,
the task of defending that method of procedure which I have set up
as the only proper one to be followed by the authorities of a socialist
state in deciding what commodities to produce. In the course of that
discussion it has probably become sufficiently evident why it would be
necessary for the authorities of our socialist state to solve the so-called
problem of imputation, that is, the problem of ascertaining the effective
importance in the productive process of each primary factor. Without
that information, those authorities would manifestly be unable to com-
pute the resources-cost of any particular commodity; hence would be
unable to determine the correct selling price for that commodity; and,
consequently, would be unable to make use of the particular method of
determining just what commodities they ought to produce which, ac-
cording to the contention of this paper, is the only correct method.
But not only would it be necessary for the authorities of a socialist
state to solve this imputation problem as a prerequisite to the employ-
ment of this particular method of guiding production, it is not unlikely
that more than one economist would question the possibility of solving
that problem at all under the conditions necessarily prevailing in a
socialist state. I seem called on, therefore, to give a few moments to
show that, in fact, the socialist authorities would find themselves quite
equal to this task.
The particular method of procedure which would seem most suitable
for dealing with this problem in the case of a socialist state is a form of
the so-called method of trial-and-error, that is, the method which con-
sists in trying out a series of hypothetical solutions till one is found.
which proves a success.
As a necessary preliminary to the explanation of the process by
which the method of trial-and-error could be used to solve the imputa-
tion problem, we must remind ourselves that at any particular time the
stock or income of each primary factor which was available for the
current production period would necessarily be a substantially deter-
minate quantity. Unless the available quantity of any factor was thus
determinate and at the same time so limited that its total was smaller
than the need for that factor, though it might be a factor of produc-
ion, it could not be an economic factor, and so could not be one of
the factors with which we are concerned.