4
Herbert J. Davenport
[March
the differences. Only so can the next things get done. Single-taxers
and socialists, for example, should postpone their issues of ultimate in-
stitutional programs—their antithesis of individualistic as against col-
lective ethical presuppositions-so long as the doctrinal positions con-
cur in proscribing private property in natural bounty. Only when prac-
tical policies diverge because of differences in theory are theoretical
dissensions to the purpose. When what to do is not at issue, it is folly
to fall to quarreling about why. The immediate problems of progress,
the policies common to programs ultimately divergent, are enough to
absorb all present attention and effort. So long as for every type of
progressive thought, a step is recognized as in the right direction, it is
mere blundering to complicate the case with the issues that can wait―
that as unactual are for the purposes unreal. Go along with your
neighbor till your paths diverge. To the socialist all merchandising
is parasitic. To me, these activities tend merely to proliferate into
extreme wastes. There should then be agreement on measures of limi-
tation say, high license taxes. If actual taxation is working regress-
ively on private wealth and income, socialists and individualists may
unite in efforts toward a system less obnoxious to the ideals of both.
Higher inheritance taxes? Yes, say I, who, in order that the competi-
tive system may both endure and deserve to endure, would check eco-
nomic stratification, would hinder the emergence of differentials and
handicaps if also the socialist says yes, as directed by his opposition
to private property in general, we can so far work together instead of
at cross purposes.
Our differences are not actual. We desire the
same particular thing, the thing at hand, only for
Join we then to get the thing that we both now want.
contest in another field. Sufficient unto each day are the quarrels
thereof. I advocate progressive taxation in general in order to mitigate
the economic inequality that in my view is putting in hazard the politi-
cal and economic democracy of the competitive order. If to my so-
cialistic neighbor the same policy appeals as a step toward the aban-
donment of the competitive order, it is still true that on either basis of
policy the thing is good. Our hopes diverge merely as to what will
come of it. I would have the officers of justice public functionaries,
and justice free-not dear, and therefore only for the rich, and there-
fore not justice—as also now I approve of free schools and free police
protection and all of this not because I am a socialist but because I
am not; because, solicitous to preserve the competive order, I fear and
deplore its inadequacies and excesses. Some among all the things that
the socialist condemns I also condemn, but from the standpoint of an-
other ideal. Not in denying his criticisms where they are due, but in
admitting and then helping to remove them, is my best service to my
different ends.
Later we may
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:35:53 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
