The appearance of Mitchell's first volume on business cycles in 1913
marks a new epoch in this field of study, replacing abstract speculation by
a detailed quantitative investigation of the phenomenon itself. And now,
after a lapse of twenty years, this problem has at last suddenly forced its
way into the front rank of issues of public policy, and thereby has marked
a new epoch in the relation of government to business.
Along with this development went the growth of the rather elusive
movement known as "Institutionalism," which means so many different
things to so many different people that doubt has arisen whether it has
any definable meaning at all. It covers certain fields of study, such as Veb-
len's evolutionary theories and the investigations of legal institutions by
Ely and Commons. But it may be more important as an underlying point
of view orienting many different kinds of specific studies and lending
changed significance to the day-to-day routine operations of the business
system. It may be that we cannot fully understand these day-to-day opera-
tions without understanding them as parts of an evolutionary movement
going back before the present forms of property rights and containing
forces destined to make the present forms obsolete. This is something
vastly different from the nineteenth century conception of progress within
an institutional framework which was expected to remain fixed because
it had found its final terminus in the system of individualism and free
contract, modified only by piecemeal control of specific abuses.
Another major development of late years is that of mathematical eco-
nomics, using new and powerful techniques and bringing its results in touch
with quantitative verification. The recent founding of the Econometric
Society is a landmark in this movement. It faces great and inherent diffi-
culties in the framing of assumptions simple enough to lend themselves
to mathematical formulas yet flexible enough to grapple effectively with
the problems of dynamic economics. Even the measurement of a demand
schedule for a manufactured product is a surprisingly baffling problem.
In the face of these difficulties, important achievements have been made,
and more are to be looked for in the future.
Much has been done lately by mathematical and quantitative methods
with the theory of general price levels and their changes. Here the most
notable recent contributions have come from the other side of the water;
but all appear to be in a decidedly controversial stage at present. Another
subject recently attacked by mathematical methods, both here and in Eng-
land, is imperfect competition. The results so far are of great interest;
but they illustrate the difficulty already mentioned, of framing usable
assumptions adequate to interpreting the complexities of actual conditions.
The time element in demand and supply schedules is particularly baffling,
while the relation between these abstract curves and the mental processes