I may take time at this point to express the personal opinion that
that branch of economics devoted to taxation can never be merely or
principally a science. Taxes are fixed much as wages are fixed, by the
play of competitive forces; but all sorts of collateral factors obscure
the process, and the competitive efficiency of many groups is low. You
may usually count on selfishness, but not always on enlightened selfish-
ness. The interests or forces whose resultant the economist seeks to
trace, vary with education, the progress of democracy, the acquisition
of political finesse and tax technique on the part of the spokesman or
representatives of such interests. As is noted hereafter, regard for
the general welfare and for sound public policy frequently exercises a
powerful influence; but this is an influence which varies greatly with
the political atmosphere, and with the character of the political leaders
who chance to be in office.
I suspect that what is true of taxation is also true of the field of
labor and other branches of economics, in which the "underlying uni-
formities which the economist seeks" are vitally dependent upon the
conscious and concerted action of social groups. Political economy is
concerned quite as much with the future as with the past. Values, prices
and wages are part of the stock in trade of the economist. They de-
pend as much upon the probable future as on the finished past. The
economist who is rusty on statistics and history, but who guesses well
the future decline and fall of economic powers, the extent to which old
alliances will be dissolved and new alignments formed, the time in which
a federal reserve system will suppress the old and create a new variety
of financial panic, the rapidity with which birth control will arrest the
"devastating torrent of children” in Protestant and Catholic countries,
the immediate and later effects of the restriction of immigration, the
interval that must pass before the concerted regulation of output
is legitimized in industry as in agriculture and labor, the effect of tax
reduction in neutralizing tax avoidance and increasing the taxable basis
―he who by imagination or instinct or reason gauges well these forces
of the future, is a better economist in my opinion, than he who is master
only of the facts of the past.
History often repeats itself. But as frequently it fails to repeat. The
economist's own work sets in motion influences which modify the group
action which he studies. The popularization of forecasting, thus, has
appreciably affected the character of the recent business cycle. What
Sir Josiah Stamp has said of statistics is equally true of economic
history; they are invaluable aids to intelligence; they can never be
substitutes for intelligence. The mind may be closed as well as en-
kindled and illuminated by erudition. It is necessary to know history
and statistics. It is just as necessary to know when to toss them over-
board. The disinterested mind and the passion for precision are of