1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
5
tance whether we designate as economic theory one or the other
body of knowledge or the two combined.
There remain many tasks for the student of economic theory,
but I doubt whether as a result of the experience of the war, or of
the progress which has been made in other branches of knowledge,
he is called upon to tear down the structure which has been gradu-
ally built up during the last one hundred and fifty years and begin
anew. The great problem which faces us today is not the problem
of reconstructing economic theory, but the problem of adequately
developing the art of economics or of what may perhaps be termed
economic engineering.
It is a familiar fact that the economic system which grew out
of the Industrial Revolution contains elements of great strength
combined with elements of serious weakness. No one can deny that
under this system remarkable results have been achieved in ex-
tending the industrial area utilized by people of European origin,
in supplying the world with efficient instruments of production,
and thereby enormously increasing productive power in the aggre-
gate.
The population of Europe in the middle of the eighteenth cen-
tury is estimated at 130 millions. At the outbreak of the war the
same region supported over 450 millions in a condition of individual
well-being superior to that of the earlier period, while over 125
millions had been added to people of European descent living in
other portions of the globe. In large measure this achievement
must be attributed to the progress of physical science, but we
can easily pick out elements in our social and political institutions
to which credit is also due.
The principle of individual responsibility of each man for the
support of himself and his family has exerted a force of tremen-
dous power, compelling to work and tending to preserve a balance
between earning power and the growth of population. The system
of free choice of occupation, combined with freedom of contract
and private property, including the right of inheritance and be-
quest, while it has doubtless been accompanied by great waste, and
produced great inequalities in the distribution of wealth, has also
offered tremendous inducements, not to those confined, by their
lack of initiative or the limitation of their opportunities, to manual
labor, but to those who could succeed in the organization and man-
agement of industry. These are strong points in an economic
system and are not to be lightly discarded.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
