reducing salaries. These are all too frequently "fancy" and therefore socially
and economically unwarranted. Yet the total of excessive salary payments
does not bulk large; salaries do not contain much that can be transferred to
labor under the existing industrial system. And there are difficulties in-
volved in transferring directly much from the returns of property and enter-
prise.
6
Perhaps about the usual supply of enterprise and capital might be forth-
coming were their returns substantially reduced; for the return required
depends largely upon what can be had. It is certainly no fixed and irreducible
thing. But with mobility of capital, returns in a given country are not inde-
pendent of possible returns in other countries. Morever, when labor be-
comes dearer and capital cheaper, the latter will be substituted in a measure,
and to that extent capital's return will tend to increase, and likewise tech-
nological unemployment. Finally, capital, if fearful of union control, may
require prospect of more than the usual return as a condition of necessary
supply.
In my opinion the possibility of raising wages generally and substantially
through collective bargaining unless there is increased efficiency and less
waste, is rather limited, however extensive and powerful unionism be-
comes. The level of wages and the welfare of the masses turn much more
upon progress in production and upon the taxation and spending policies.
of government than upon any such thing as the control of wages through
collective bargaining or through law. Unions should look to results in
production as one road to general welfare. Certainly government revenue
systems and expenditures might be more extensively employed than they
have been to increase the real income of the masses.
Brief reference may be made to the doctrine that wages must be made
high and kept high to provide the mass purchasing power required to main-
tain a market outlet for goods produced. This doctrine lies behind much
of American union, and now of public, policy. It is the subject of much
current discussion.
The doctrine of high wages is open to criticism because it makes too
much of the idea of a limited market. Very frequently there is failure to
realize that the whole value of what is produced is distributed to labor,
management and the owners of property employed-that each dollar,
whether obtained as wages, interest or profit, has potential buying power.
The doctrine does, however, contain a large kernel of significant fact. The
rate of saving and investment, the amount of speculation and room for
**error in forecasting the market, vary with the distribution of the industrial
3 According to Leven, Moulton and Warburton (America's Capacity to Consume, pp. 31
et seq.) shares in the national income of 1929 were as follows: wages, 34.1 billions; sal-
aries, 18.5 billions, of which 3.3 billions went to corporation officials; returns to investors,
including interest, dividends, rents and undistributed income in the form of additions to sur-
plus, 14.4 billions.
6**