The petitions being filed with the Board of Tax Appeals exceed the number
disposed of by more than 200 per month.

It has been estimated that

the Board would be required to devote approximately four years-if no
other cases were presented to it-to clear its docket.
the General Counsel is literally swamped with work.¹
The office of

This situation, in my opinion, is largely (but not wholly) the product
of a misplaced and legalistic ideal which led our administrative authorities
to pattern their work on the model of American court procedure.
They have assumed, almost unconsciously, that there is in each tax
case a precisely determinable legal liability, and that every disputed
point, to be decided rightly, must be finally decided by the Supreme
Court of the United States. In all this we are worshiping false gods.
In tens of thousands of income tax cases there is no precisely determinable
legal liability; and the income tax turns up new questions in
such volume that no system of courts could ever possibly decide them.
In this work we need less striving after ideally exact judicial interpretation,
and more appreciation of the bewildering subtlety and overwhelming
volume of the work to be done. We need to see that the
application of a complicated direct tax, calling for the annual assessment
of millions of taxpayers, is a wholesale job, and cannot be
conducted after the manner of a lawsuit; that a prompt-indeed, in
many cases an advance-decision of disputed points better serves the
ends of justice than a procedure of protracted appeal. As the Treasury
report, from which I have already quoted, very cogently says: "The
collection of revenue is primarily an administrative and not a judicial
problem. As far as the federal income tax is concerned, a field of
administration has been turned into a legal battlefield.”
While superficial idealism and unassimilated ideals are mischievous,
there is deep need and, fortunately, a growing place in taxation, for the
mind that seeks truth and the general, as opposed to the special, good.
As I have recently said elsewhere, self-interest is the dominant but
not the sole motive in taxation. The first impulse of a healthy human
being, when threatened with a tax, is to resist. But to resist successfully,
the individual must work in and with a group; and insensibly the
raw, egoistic impulse which first animated him is changed to a group
impulse, which accepts group standards and a group ethic. Individual
selfishness is profoundly modified by class selfishness, and in time the
latter may, and often does, change to something higher. The guiding
light frequently becomes social, or national, in its range. The greatest
good of the greatest number replaces "my good, and that of my class."
**A sense of general equity, of fair play, of broad social policy is
awakened and plays a powerful part. Disinterested students of
1 Report of the Joint Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation, Vol. III. A
Survey of the Administration of the Income and Excess Profits Taxes. Washington,
1927, pp. 2, 38.**
