10
Henry R. Seager
[March
mind is an industrial society in which the average level of intelligence
and understanding is continuously rising, in which the ownership of
capital is becoming more and more widely diffused and in which the
workers are progressively better paid for more congenial work varied
by more ample opportunities for leisure and recreation.
With an
increase in average intelligence I venture also to hope that there may be
such improvements in our political organization that public service
industries may be more commonly not only owned but efficiently oper-
ated by the government for the common benefit, that coöperative enter-
prises may become more numerous and more habitually successful, and
that the employees who continue to work for profit-seeking employers
may be given a progressively larger voice in the determination of the
conditions under which they work and may be insured a reasonable
share in the profits they help to earn for such employers.
Toward the realization of this ideal, American trade unions have
made a contribution of inestimable value. Without them the struggle
between employers and employees would have been so unequal that the
wage system all along the line might have become, what it still is at
its worst, another name for the sweating system, and the gulf that
separates employers and employees might have been so widened that
the proposal to bridge it would have seemed chimerical. In their work
of fostering the independence and raising the standards of wage-
earners, trade unions have necessarily developed as fighting organiza-
tions. They have constantly stressed the opposition of interest be-
tween employers and employees and the strike has been their most
effective weapon.
If my analysis is correct we have now reached a
stage in public service industries where we can no longer tolerate the
use of the strike and where we are beginning to establish standards
through legislation and through adjustment boards which render resort
to it unnecessary.
Is the company union or the trade union best fitted for the further
development of the employee in public service industries as a worker
and as a citizen? Certainly many of the company unions that have
been launched in the last few years have little to commend them as
schools of efficiency or of forceful citizenship. They have been imposed
on reluctant employees by employers whose chief motive was to dis-
courage by this means all other forms of organization, a purpose
which has been frankly manifested in rules that on the one hand require
the employee to belong to the company union and on the other to
forswear allegiance to any and every other form of labor organization.
But along with these trade-union-smashing company unions are others
which put no limitations upon the right of the employee to belong to
other organizations but yet offer him so much more than the fighting
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
