8
00
Jacob Viner
[March
them as temporary, self-correcting aberrations or excrescences of what is
basically a sound economic system. Having rejected the conventional pic-
ture of the system, they tend increasingly to adopt another one, rapidly ap-
proaching equal conventionalization, but following another pattern, in
which the evils are inherent in the system and cannot be excised without its
drastic reconstruction and its substantial operation by government.
Their account of the traditional economic theory is not wholly a carica-
ture, but it is overdrawn and distorted. It deliberately disregards the failure
of government to behave according to the rules laid down by the orthodox
theory as necessary if its conclusions are to have practical validity, and
it especially overlooks the long line of great men in the orthodox tradi-
tion, by no means already at an end, who by no stretch of the imagination
can be charged with having exploited it to protect evils against reform.
But this is in the present connection significant only as it prejudices these
zealous reformers against utilizing for their own good purposes the aid
the old doctrines can still furnish. Their picture of the evils of the present
economic system may also be painted in too strident colors, but it is un-
doubtedly close enough to the truth to make complacency indefensible.
Where in my opinion they are most gravely in error, however, is that in
rejecting lock-stock-and-barrel the traditional economic theory, they are
abandoning habits of mind and analytical tools which are still essential if
evils are not only correctly to be identified but are to be ascribed to their
proper causes, and if remedies are not to be advocated which may prove
worse than the diseases they are prescribed for.
As a by-product of the breach with the older body of doctrine, the
economic profession is tending to wipe out that line of cleavage which in
this country has been so marked almost since the foundation of the Eco-
nomic Association between the teachings of the professional economists,
on the one hand, and the practices of government and the beliefs of the
lay public, on the other hand. I, for one, would welcome this reconcilia-
tion if it resulted from our final conversion of the lay public. I think,
however, that the reverse has happened to a substantial extent, and that
economic doctrine is now following public opinion and government prac-
tice much more than it is influencing them. For obvious reasons which have
no counterpart in this country, this is now of course the routine situation
in totalitarian countries. Its occurrence in this country is not, I am certain,
due to any significant extent to a new subservience of the profession to
external opinion. Its explanation lies largely, I think, in the fact that under
the impact of depression conditions the economists have in large numbers
abandoned the traditional economic doctrines, with their emphasis on the
long view, and have turned instead to the short view which government
and the lay public have always tended to take. It is true that in adopting
the short view many of the younger economists have not merely taken
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:54:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
