and of having competitive success depend largely upon managerial ability,
sound organization and the like.

The characteristic union emphasis on the weakness of the individual
bargainer and the necessity for concerted action as a defense against market
forces has generally been at the neglect of the other side of the picture
placed before the public. Under collective bargaining the workers' representative
may not only be free from any fear of injury at the hands of management,
but he may be, and very frequently is, the better informed and more
skillful bargainer in so far as labor matters are concerned. The union, by
providing strike benefits, gives reserve power and ability to strike; and
more important, by preaching solidarity and building up and sustaining
morale, it may develop the will as well as the power "to see things through."
The supply of labor may be controlled, and competition for work restricted
and employment rationed in a variety of ways among them, the closed
shop, closed union books, high initiation fees, restrictive rules relating to
apprentices and helpers. Unions, like employers and politicians, dislike
too much competition. Finally, under collective agreements, changes to
the disadvantage of the workers cannot readily be made without due notice
and consent; terms of employment and perhaps tenure of job cease to be
"at will."

As seen by the trade unionist, who acts upon a bargaining theory of
wages and who, like the business man, generalizes from concrete experience
in industry, there is, therefore, a tremendous difference between the results
of unrestrained individual bargaining and the results to be obtained
through concerted action. As John Mitchell said, "Trade unionism thus recognizes
that the destruction of the workman is the individual bargain, and
the salvation of the working man is the joint, united, collective bargain.”1
Thus it is claimed that collective bargaining is necessary to equalize bargaining
power between workers and employer, to standardize terms of employment
as a basis for fair competition, to reduce pressure in the trade
or industry, and to stabilize the employment relationship.
To this statement of the case, now decades old, the American unions
have added a third argument-that wages must be increased in proportion
to increases in industrial efficiency in order to balance consumption and
production and to maintain the necessary market outlet for industrial products.
2 Officially adopted as a labor doctrine by the American Federation of
Labor in 1925, it has been accepted by many business men, not a few economists
and obviously by many persons holding public office. The same is
true of a related but inharmonious doctrine to the effect that in depression
maintaining or increasing wages is necessary to maintain or to effect an increase


**Organized Labor, p. 4.

1

* American unions are not exceptional in their adherence to this doctrine. For years the
German unions, at any rate the "free unions," have taken much the same position. It is also
espoused by the organized labor movements of other countries.**