1928]
Ideals and Idealism in Taxation
5
Must we then swim only with the stream? Is there no place for the
sound but unpalatable truth? Has the tax economist no effective
function but that of guiding, perhaps moderating, the selfish interests
of powerful groups? Are ideals and idealism in taxation useless, or
worse than useless?
Certainly, in my opinion, the callow idealist, the jejune preachments
of the narrow-minded, are worse than useless. Idealism as a striving
after perfect truth or justice, is mostly a nuisance. It does good, but
more harm than good, if injected into practical affairs. The ideal of
a single land tax, or of a single sales tax, or of a single tax on luxuries
or expenditures, after all their repercussions and reactions are weighed,
does more to discredit the partial truth resident in each proposal than
to give due effect to that partial truth. Narrowness and restricted
vision are unforgivable sins in those who essay to guide tax thinking.
"The ends of government,” said John Stuart Mill, "are as comprehen-
sive as those of the social union. They consist of all the good, and all
the immunity from evil, which the existence of government can be made,
either directly or indirectly, to bestow." Mill stated thus, to my think-
ing, the deepest truth applicable to taxation and tax making. Its valid-
ity, I think, is assumed by the untutored practical mind. However far
his conduct may depart from this path, the man on the street accepts it
as the true path. To obscure that path in the name of perfect truth,
or ideal justice, or economic "science," is unforgivable. In taxation
let the teacher be silent who cannot hold many objects and ends in mind
at the same time; or let him speak only of the narrow, technical problem
whose solution requires learning rather than wisdom.
Taxes are as complex as life. The moralist calls for just taxes; but
taxes cannot just be just. The administrator asks for simple taxes; but
experience shows that they cannot simply be simple. Some politicians
would mould taxes wholly in accordance with political expediency; but
statesmen realize that in the long run this would be impolitic. The business
man demands practical taxes; but financial history proves that it is imprac-
ticable to make them merely practical. The legalist wants taxes adminis-
tered strictly according to law; but the record of the income tax and the
property tax makes it clear that such taxes cannot be successfully adminis-
tered by methods meticulously legal.
The injury done by a misplaced ideal is well illustrated in the appli-
cation of the federal income tax. The administration of the tax is, in
many respects, deserving of the highest praise, and it has been greatly
improved in recent months. But the application of the tax to the larger
and more complicated cases in the past, has been characterized by
vacillation, delay, and demoralizing uncertainty. We are told in a re-
cent report by the Treasury Department:
More than 19,000 undecided cases are pending before the Board of Tax
Appeals, involving aggregate deficiencies of approximately $550,000,000.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:43:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
