10
Frederick C. Mills
[March
Not first among its architects, but a dominant figure, was Adolf Wagner.
Seventy years ago Wagner set a pattern for economic thought completely
subordinated to the ends of national power. (I note, in passing, Wagner's
term for the attitude of those who were not guided by sound national
egoism. It was no mean achievement in the coupling of words to define
this reprehensible state of mind as "fanatical objectivity.")
If criticism of objectivity in the social sciences were confined to Sombart,
Wagner, and other advocates of the supreme state, it would perhaps carry
little weight with us. But men who speak with authority for the social
sciences and for scientific method, and whose interests and motives are not
open to question, have recently challenged social scientists on this funda-
mental issue. Charles A. Beard cites "the state of uncertainty and per-
plexity reigning in the very midst of the so-called objective school" as proof
that "the old assumptions of absolute neutrality no longer satisfy the human
spirit." He believes that the idea of a value-free, objective social science is
an illusion. Julian Huxley notes "the entanglement of social science with
problems of value" and concludes that "to understand and describe a
system involving values is impossible without some judgment of values,
and still more impossible without such value-judgments is the other
scientific function, that of control." And Robert Lynd in his provocative
book Knowledge for What? deprecates the fact that the young social
sciences, "hiding behind their precocious beards of 'dispassionate research'
and 'scientific objectivity' are reluctant to accept full partnership with
man in the adventure of living."
There is an issue here that we may not lightly dismiss. The two extreme
positions may be briefly suggested. At one limit stands an "objectivity"
that is oblivious to ends, purposes, relative values, that puts all observations
on the same dead level of importance, or unimportance, that conceives the
work of the scientist to be done when he has investigated something, any-
thing, by tidily arranging all data that might bear on it. It is bloodless, cold,
dispassionate, and utterly meaningless. At the other limit, every scholar uses
his own yardstick of relative values. These values lie beyond all testing
and questioning, but they furnish, for the individual to whom they have
been revealed, the ultimate touchstone. All judgments of means are based
on these values. Research is an individual adventure.
Of course, neither of these extreme alternatives is acceptable. One means,
for the economist, a withdrawal from life, acquiescence in whatever is,
complete indifference to the meaning of the forms he is studying, or of
alternative forms of economic organization. The other means the loss of a
hard-won heritage, renunciation of the hope of cumulative growth of
economic knowledge, surrender to rudderless whims and the unpredictable
diversities of individual taste. Our problem as economists is the difficult one
of serving our generation in meeting its urgent present needs and of pre-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:52:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
