4
Jacob Viner
[March
from any substantial liberation of the poor from dependence solely on
their own efforts for the means of subsistence of themselves and their
children. The extreme conservatives and the extreme radicals of the time-
who, as so often in history, were on the same side on a specific issue—and
also the humanitarians and clergy, stressed in opposition to the views
of the economists the moral and political rights of the needy to be given
food and shelter with a minimum of humiliation and of deliberate inter-
ference with their accustomed patterns of family and social life. In this
instance, as in many others, it was possible plausibly to picture the clash
between the long view and the short as a clash between the humane and
the hard-hearted, although the economists of the time of course insisted
that the policy they advocated, while immediately severe, would ulti-
mately prove to be the kinder of the two to the poor.
Although it is obviously not without direct relevance to present-day
problems, I am not concerned here with the merits of this ancient con-
troversy. I have cited it only to help make clear the differing turn which
may be given to public policy accordingly as the long view or the short
is dominant, and to illustrate the characteristic approach of the orthodox
economist, from that day to this, to policy questions.
Now this habit of taking the long view is not only characteristic of the
orthodox economic theorist, but in the discussion of matters of economic
policy it is often the principal characteristic by which he can be distin-
guished from other professional economists or even from the intelligent
layman.
In the day-to-day process of adapting public policy to meet felt needs,
on the other hand, the problems always manifest themselves in the form
of immediate pressures of one sort or another, and the legislator or
official tends to look for correspondingly immediate solutions. This is
"natural" behavior, in the sense both that it is what one should expect
to occur, and that it has its socially useful aspects.
Legislators and officials are typically busy and harried men. Except
under the special circumstances of major election campaigns, when the
pattern of party debate may by chance turn on the relative merits of the
long-run programs of the contending parties, and except for the occasional
opportunity of the legislator or the official to divest himself of the cares
of the moment and, assuming the rôle of the statesman, to give patient
examination to the needs of the future, there is constant preoccupation
with the problems which are immediately pressing, and little stimulus to
take thought as to whether the proffered solutions are likely to prove
lasting ones. There is especially little urge to go hunting for problems
which are not yet felt as such but which may prove troublesome in the
distant future.
It would be a mistake, however, to take for granted that the immediate
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:54:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
