1923]
Company Unions vs. Trade Unions
their trade union behind them serves to deter the employer from
initiating unfavorable changes, and when he does attempt such changes
the members immediately affected can resist much more vigorously
because of the support of the membership at large on which they can
usually count.
For all these reasons trade unions promise greater benefits to their
members than company unions, but there is another side that must
not be entirely overlooked. Overemphasis of the struggle aspect may
result in so hampering production that the larger share of the smaller
output that employees secure leaves them worse off than the smaller
share of the larger output that might have gone to them had they
been without such powerful organizations. The conditions that have
developed in the building trades in New York and Chicago illustrate
this. Many employers claim that the restrictive rules, jurisdictional
controversies, and wasteful practices of the unions so add to the cost
of construction that the whole building industry is kept in a depressed
condition when it might be highly prosperous for all concerned. This
may be an exaggerated view but no one who has followed recent investi-
gations can question that wage-earners in the building trades pay
collectively in unemployment and irregular employment a high price
for any benefits the restrictive policies of their craft unions may seem
to yield. Only when the standard conditions secured through trade
union bargaining are free from wasteful and hampering restrictions,
such as would not and could not be exacted by company unions, is the
case entirely in their favor even as regards wages, hours, and working
conditions.
The superiority of the company over the trade union as regards
low labor costs and the "ready acceptance by the employees of changes
deemed by the management to be necessary to the good of the business,"
the principal desiderata of employers, is obvious from the very nature
of the two organizations. Closer contact with and better under-
standing of the production problems of the establishments they serve
make the officers and members of company unions much more open-
minded with reference to proposed changes than the officials of trade
unions can be expected to be. This difference is registered in the
frequent complaint of employers that the trade unions try to run their
business and the countercharge of trade union leaders that company
unions (to quote from the A. F. of L. resolution on the subject) are
The more significant declarations in this resolution (No. 201) adopted at the
1919 convention are:
"Whereas many steel corporations and other industrial institutions have insti-
tuted in their plants systems of collective bargaining akin to the Rockefeller plan,
and
"Whereas extensive experience has shown that while employers are busily carrying
on propaganda lauding these company unions to the skies as a great improvement
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
