dogmas, preconceptions, or even in some cases thoughts, the fortunate man
can move freely in any direction, wherever the wind may list. If he feels
the need for guidance, there is always available today yesterday's position
of his official superiors and tomorrow the different position they took today.
In finding good-sounding reasons for what has already been decided upon,
he has a distinctive and useful function, both because the vitality of the
democratic process is dependent upon our continuing to believe that it
provides us with reasonably wise and beneficent government, and also because
statesmen's intuitions have often a genuine economic logic dimly in
their background. He shares also with other types of economists the useful
rôle of finding good uses for bad laws, and thus contributes to the
most important function of the art of public administration: the making
of silk purses out of legislative sows' ears.

The handicaps of the academic theorist of the older dispensation as
a useful member of a policy-formulating staff are probably even more
clearly visible to other members of the economic profession than to members
of other professions. There is in fact a definite cleavage between the habits
of thought of this species of theorist and those of other groups in the
profession, including many of those who help guide Leviathan in its daily
gyrations. The continued depression has obviously made a deep impression
on the latter, and made them impatient of or even violently hostile to the
traditional corpus of economic theory, which they look upon as an instrument
for the exercise of the tyranny of the dead mind over the living. They
seem to believe increasingly that its rôle has been, even in the long-past days
of its almost unchallenged dominance, "to light fools the way to dusty
death." The world it approvingly describes of atomistic competition, and
the ethical approval which, as they read it, it translates to the actual world
by its failure clearly to contrast the ideal with the real, make it appear
to them too far divorced from the present-day realities and values to warrant
faith in its usefulness as an aid to the guidance of social policy. Instead
of the economy of effective competition, of freedom of individual
initiative, of equality of economic opportunity, of steady and full employment,
pictured in the traditional theory, they see an economy dominated
by giant corporations in almost every important field of industry outside
agriculture, an economy marked by great concentration of wealth and
economic power, and great disparity of income and of opportunity for
betterment. They note the apparently unending flow of evidence from
investigating committees and courts of the flagrant misuse of concentrated
economic power. They observe with alarm the failure of our economy for
ten successive years to give millions of men able to work and anxious to
work the opportunity to earn their daily bread. And seeing the actual
world so, they refuse to accept as useful for their purposes a type of
economic theory which as they read it either ignores these evils or treats