than twelve o'clock, lest they should interfere with other fixtures.
Finally, in 1821, the Political Economy Club-to whose honored centenary
this Association within the last month has sent its message of
congratulation was organized nominally to support the Merchants'
Free Trade Petition of 1820, but really, as its first resolutions set
forth, to effect the formation of a society for promoting the knowledge
of political economy."

In

The counterpart of scientific consciousness was popular vogue.
1811, Boileau compiled his Introduction to the Study of Political
Economy "particularly for those to whom rank or fortune hold out
the noble prospect of being one day called to legislate for their fellowsubjects.
"917

At the other extreme Mrs. Marcet, a few years later, presented
her Conversations in Political Economy-destined to run
through many editions-in order to bring the science within the reach
of any "intelligent young person, fluctuating between the impulse of
her heart and the progress of her reason, and naturally imbued with
all the prejudices and popular feelings of uninformed benevolence.18
20

Maria Edgeworth recorded in 1823 that political economy was
displacing the ordinary disciplines as the necessary equipment of
nursery governesses and that “it had become high fashion with blue
ladies to make a great jabbering on the subject."

9919 In 1823 McCulloch

trumpeted: "The time cannot be far distant when a knowledge, or at
least some little attention to, Political Economy will be considered as
necessary for a legislator as a knowledge of Greek”-in itself no mean
exhibit of the economist's spiral.2 And almost at the same time an
anonymous author presented "to the enlightened ideas, and acute perception
of the American people" A Treatise of Political Economy...
in the form of a Romaunt, for the more pleasing accommodation of
readers; wherein the subject "presumed to be considered upon strict
philosophical, mathematical, and geometrical principles" is explained
in a series of letters to Aristippus from Aristander, "perceived in a deep
vision.9921

The reflex of scientific pursuit and popular favor was practical
effect. In the five years that followed Waterloo-roughly, the period


**of post-bellum reconstruction-political economy exercised a practical
influence never before equalled. In every phase of the nation's life
there was enactment or repeal in accord with “the verdict of the econ-
15 Autobiographic Recollections of George Pryme (1870), p.
121.

16 Political Economy Club: Minutes of Proceedings, etc., (1921), p. 1.
"Preface, p. v.

18 Preface, p. ix.

19 Life and Letters of Maria Edgeworth (ed. Hare, 1895), vol. II, p. 65.
20 Autobiographic Recollections of George Pryme, p. 127.
21Baltimore, 1824.**
