crease in purchasing power, which is the appropriate road to recovery. The
rôle these doctrines have of late been playing in public affairs is well known.
Now what have economists to say concerning the theory of collective
bargaining as thus set forth? And what shall one say of what economists
say?

It need hardly be remarked that present-day economists find a less unimportant
place for unionism and its theory of collective bargaining than did
those of earlier generations. Indeed, some of them find an important rôle
for collective dealing in employment relationships. Yet, most economists,
in the language of Professor Smart, when reviewing the Webbs' Industrial
Democracy, would ask whether the case does not prove too much.³ They
have been at pains to show the theory's neglect of important factors, such
as the competitive demand for labor, and the limited control that can be
exercised; and they criticize the exaction of unjustified differential advantages
and a warped national economy. A few present-day economists are
indeed not far removed from Cairnes of 1870; they see practically no opportunity
for collective control if very harmful results are not to follow.
Economists, as has been said of professors, are men "who think otherwise."
In this brief discussion only a few of the more important questions raised
by economists can receive consideration. Differences among economic
theorists cannot be definitely followed up.

Is collective bargaining needed to defend the workers' interests? The
theory of wages held by most economists runs largely in terms of marginal
productivity. According to this theory, each employer has reason to hire
labor and to purchase other factors needed in his business up to that point
where the value of the contribution of each unit of labor or other factor
is substantially the same as its cost. In an ideal state and in the absence of
friction, there is active competition for labor until this results, not only in
the given plant but in all plants in all industries. Hence, whatever may be
the forces affecting the supplies of labor and the other factors in production
and whatever really determines the prices of products, wages tend to
conform to marginal productivity. 4 The weak are protected, and approximately
fair wages as between industries are obtained-in so far as competitive
demand is effective.

Thus the economist emphasizes a factor-demand-not sufficiently emphasized
by the labor spokesman or the "labor economist." This factor must
be emphasized if the facts regarding wages, say, during the last 50 or 100
years are to be explained. The demand for labor, enlarged by increasing
capital invested and better utilized resources, has caused more and more
workers to be absorbed into industry at increased wages as the generations
**See The Distribution of Income, chs. 20-25, especially p. 290.
*The theory is clearly and accurately stated by J. R. Hicks, The Theory of Wages (1932).
See especially chapters 1 and 2.**
