1926]
Economics and War
5
abysmally ignorant of what the real stakes of diplomacy are. They
do not think in terms of railroad concessions, mines, banking, and
trade....Each contest for economic privileges appears to the public
as a kind of sporting event with loaded weapons. The people wish
their team, that is, their country, to win. . . .Business is the chief form
which competition between nations can assume. To be worsted in
that competition means more than to lose money; it means a loss of
social importance as well.... The way to increase national prestige is
to win economic victories by diplomatic methods. . . . Armament is
added as
an 'insurance' for diplomacy, and of course military
preparation always calls forth military preparation. Every inter-
national incident is seen then, not on its 'merits', but in its relation to the
whole vast complicated game, forever teetering on the edge of war."
It may be that some of the interests which arouse these belligerent
emotions and around which they cluster are the immediate or lasting
rational economic interests of different national groups. It is plain
that some of them are the real interests of particular men or particular
classes within different national groups. But, as I have said, there is
no correlation between the economic importance of these interests and
their power to rally a people to their defense. They may be wholly
factitious, and yet be potent.
There is instruction to be had from recent developments in the field
of sports. I mean, of course, intercollegiate and other inter-group
sports, in which small teams of selected competitors carry with them
into their contests the rivalries of the groups they represent. Members
of these rival groups like to absorb themselves in these conflicts by
reading about them. The purveyors of sporting news have found that
this is an appetite which can be stimulated, that the interests of persons
outside the rival groups may be engaged, and even that the number of
partisans may be increased.
They have found also that the number of competitions may be fruit-
fully multiplied by bringing existing contests into new relations. An
intricate system of mythical regional and class "championships" has
been invented. Teams are ranked by the percentage of victories, by
the total scores they have made, and in various other ways. Ingenious
methods of rating the achievements of individual players have been
devised.
These artifices succeed in entrapping the interests of readers. And
they accomplish more than that. Some of these make-believe com-
petitions become real. The spirit of rivalry reaches out and takes hold
of them. They supply new criteria of superiority, new symbols of
prestige. Some of them may come to be regarded as expressions of
*The Stakes of Diplomacy, pp. 76-83.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 01:20:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
