10
Henry B. Gardner
[March
earnings exceed what is required for the necessities of life. But
the fact seems to be that the productive power of the nation, off-
set as it is by waste and misdirected energy, is still insufficient to
provide very much more than the means of a bare livelihood for
all, even if income were equally distributed.
We must admit that the evidence on this point is not decisive,
for our knowledge of the amount and distribution of the national
income is far from complete. It is sufficient, however, for esti-
mates in the approximate accuracy of which we may place con-
siderable confidence. The most carefully worked out estimates
are those made by King for the United States and Bowley for the
United Kingdom, both for the period a few years preceding the
The results reached in these two independent investigations
tend to create confidence in the substantial accuracy of cach, and
both confirm the statements I have made.
war.
King estimated the annual product of the United States at
$30,530,000,000, a per capita product of $332. Bowley esti-
mated the per capita product of home industry in the United
Kingdom at about $220, which would be increased to $240 if we
include the earnings of British investments in foreign countries.
The whole of this product is, of course, not available for living
expenses. We must deduct the savings required for the main-
tenance and development of industry and such portion of taxes
as is not shifted to the consumer and thus included in living ex-
penses. King estimated the annual savings in the United States
at two billions, using as a basis the increase in the census figures
of wealth between 1900 and 1904, the latest figures then available.
The figures for 1912 showed that between 1904 and 1912 the in-
crease had been at the rate of four billions. Deducting this sum
and an allowance for taxes from the total would leave about 26
billions available for living expenses. This sum evenly distributed
with due allowance for age distribution, according to the scale
usually employed, would yield about $1300 for a family of father,
mother, and three children under fifteen years of age. According
to Chapin's estimate of 1907 it took $900 to provide for the physi-
cal necessities of a healthful life for such a family in New York.
To quote his exact words:
It seems safe to conclude from all the data we have been considering
that an income of under $800 is not enough to permit the maintenance
of a normal standard. . . An examination of the items of the budget
shows that the families having from $900 to $1,000 a year are able, in
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
