Neither of these factors was present in our experience to a degree
sufficient to justify resort to bank credit financing. The possible attitude
of neutrals did not even figure; while public disposition towards
increased tax burdens was grim acceptance, tinctured with nothing
worse than that degree of grumbling which in matters of taxation is
the mark of a decent self-respect. In so far as our necessary resort
to inflation financing can be explained at all, it is traceable to that
"borrow cheap" policy, born of false analogy, fiscal absolutism and
neglect of expert opinion, which in the Civil War lashed us with fiat
currency, and in this war scourged us with fiat credit.
The amazing feature of this process is the completeness with which
it remained unavowed by its sponsors and undiscerned by the public.
The certificate of indebtedness which in the seven weeks interval between
the Revenue act of March 3, and the First Liberty Loan act of April
24, 1917, passed from its traditional rôle as a short-time investment
obligation issued in anticipation of the proceeds of a funded loan
designed to meet extraordinary expenditure, to an habitual device for
the extension of bank credit in the form of government deposits by subscribing
financial institutions, continued to be officially described as a
mere convenient mode of avoiding monetary strain, with never an intimation
of wider significance."

34

The device of permissive "payment by credit," worked out we are
told, in connection with the First Liberty Loan at a Sunday conference
in May, 1917, between representatives of the Treasury, of the Federal
Reserve Board and of the New York Liberty Loan Committee, was
extended to certificate borrowing as a whole, with consequences of the
utmost gravity, almost by administrative tolerance.
There was no intimation that in essence a new borrowing policy had
been inaugurated, with neither specific authorization nor general comprehension;
that the certificate of indebtedness had been transformed
into the British Treasury Bill on Ways and Means Advance, unknown
and untried in our experience, and that by its lavish use we were heading
straight for the evils which the Cunliffe Commission a year before
had explored and made public, as brilliantly as its great predecessor
the Bullion Committee had done a century earlier as to a related


**problem.3

35

33Cf. the present writer's War Borrowing (1919), ch. II.
R. C. Leffingwell in "Proceedings of Academy of Political Science" (New York),
June, 1920, p. 29.

35Mr. Paul M. Warburg, formerly a member of the Federal Reserve Board, in an
interesting paper on "Inflation as a World Problem" (Proceedings of Academy of
Political Science, New York, June, 1920, p. 117) has dissented from contentions
similar to the above, expressed by me in another connection (ibid., p. 62), and
has expressed doubt as to whether "a certificate of indebtedness in itself, is an**