1936] Accomplishments and Prospects of American Economics
3
and more was a most luxuriant crop of system theories of a new sort. If
there was one thing that American economics did not do during that period,
it was to become dominantly historical.
To explain this fact it may be sufficient to recall that these Pilgrim
Fathers were individuals, independent-minded, differing from one another,
and no more prepared to accept uncritically the more extreme forms of
German doctrines than those of their own country. They brought back
with them a social type of ethical background, but not a particularistic
type of nationalism. Their conception of the increased rôle of the State
was at the service of this social ethics, not of narrow nationalistic ends.
They genuinely wished a broader groundwork of historical fact to put
system theory on a proper basis, but not to displace it entirely. On the whole,
they were, and remained, more nearly in the current of the English tradi-
tion than in that of Germany.
While the younger members of the group were laying their foundations,
the commanding figure of Francis A. Walker dominated the field; his
Political Economy, appearing in 1883, took rank as the outstanding Amer-
ican treatise, and bridged the interval between the earlier classical period
and the later marginalism. Soon after, the younger group began to put
forth their works. As might be expected, there were many special studies;
but far more revealing were a few that expressed the writers' general points
of view-my father's Philosophy of Wealth, Patten's Premises of Political
Economy and his Consumption of Wealth, and Henry C. Adams's classic
monograph on The State in Relation to Industrial Action. Here was an
unmistakable reorientation, neither classical nor purely historical. By the
end of the eighties, Ely's Introduction to Political Economy had appeared;
and two papers by my father and one by Stuart Wood had staked out the
marginal productivity theory of distribution. The phase of preparation was
at an end.
Systematic Marginal Economics
Of the various forms of systematic marginal economics which had their
independent origin in this country, there is little I can profitably attempt
to say in the time available, save that they caused this country to take rank
with the leading foreign countries in the development of theoretical eco-
nomics which was directed to analyzing the conditions of a stable or a
static equilibrium. The few comments I shall make are not so much on the
marginal economics as on our attitude toward it.
One is that the marginal or differential method is and remains perhaps
the greatest single tool of economic analysis; and its usefulness is by no
means confined to the study of the simple conditions of perfect and stable
equilibrium. Another is that these studies of equilibrium are not end-
products, and not to be construed as finished pictures of the actual world;
in my father's case at least great care was taken not to present them as
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:50:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
