Like most teachers of economic theory, I have found it quite worth
while to spend some time studying any particular problem in hand from
the standpoint of a socialist state. In fact I have more than once found
it profitable to work out, from that standpoint, a quite specific solu-
tion of the problem in question-setting up as the proper criterion of
a sound solution that it should seem entirely reasonable in view of the
essential nature of a socialist state. Tonight, I am applying this
method of procedure to a very fundamental problem of any coöperative
economic order, that is, the problem embodied in this question: What
is the proper method of determining just what commodities shall be
produced from the economic resources at the disposal of a given com-
munity?
Under the present economic order of free private initiative, the actual
decision as to what commodities shall be produced is made very simply.
First, on the basis of a vast complex of institutions, customs and laws,
the citizen adopts a line of conduct which provides him with a money
income of greater or less volume. Secondly, that citizen comes on the
market with said income demanding from those persons who have volun-
tarily assumed the rôle of producers, whatever commodities, he, the
citizen, chooses. Thirdly, the producers promptly submit to the dic-
tation of the citizen in this matter, provided always that said citizen
brings along with his demand entire readiness to pay for each commod-
ity a price equal to the cost of producing that commodity. In the
case of a socialist state, the proper method of determining what com-
modities shall be produced would be in outline substantially the same.
as that just described. That is, the correct general procedure would
be this: (1) the state would assure to the citizen a given money income
and (2) the state would authorize the citizen to spend that income as
he chose in buying commodities produced by the state-a procedure
which would virtually authorize the citizen to dictate just what com-
modities the economic authorities of the state should produce.