1929]
Production in a Socialist State
Now, setting out from this assumption that the quantity of any eco-
nomic factor which is available for any particular productive period
is substantially determinate, I shall assume that the authorities of our
socialist state, in trying to ascertain the effective importance of each
primary factor, would adopt the following procedure. (1) They would
set about constructing factor-valuation tables in which they gave each
factor that valuation, which, on the basis of much careful study, they
believed to be the nearest approximation to its correct valuation which
they could work out in advance of experience; (2) they would then pro-
ceed to carry on their functions as managers of all productive oper-
ations as if they considered the valuations given in their provisional
tables to be the absolutely correct valuations; (3) while thus acting,
they would after all keep a close watch for results which would indicate
that some of their provisional valuations were incorrect; (4) if such
results appeared, they would then make the needed corrections in the
factor tables, lowering any valuations which had proved too high, rais-
ing any which had proved too low; (5) finally, they would repeat this
procedure until no further evidence of divergence from the correct.
valuations was forthcoming.
I hardly need say that the crucial stage in the above procedure is
the third, that is, the stage during which the authorities would be on
the watch to discover one or more indications that some of the valu-
ations which they had put into the provisional tables were wrong—were
too high or too low. Here the all-important question is this: Is it
reasonable to expect that such indication would be forthcoming when-
ever particular factor valuations actually were too high or too low? The
correct answer is surely an affirmative one. If, in regulating productive
processes, the authorities were actually using for any particular factor
a valuation which was too high or too low, that fact would soon disclose
itself in unmistakable ways. Thus, supposing that, in the case of a
particular factor, the valuation given in the provisional factor tables.
was too high, that fact would inevitably lead the authorities to be
unduly economical in the use of that factor; and this conduct, in turn,
would make the amount of that factor which was available for the cur-
rent productive period larger than the amount which was consumed.
during that period. In other words, a too-high valuation of any factor
would cause the stock of that factor to show a surplus at the end of
the productive period. If, now, we reverse our hypothesis and suppose
that the valuation of a particular factor which appeared in the factor
tables was too low, that fact would inevitably lead the authorities to
be too lavish in the use of that factor; and this conduct, in turn, would
result in making the amount of that factor available for the current
productive period smaller than the amount needed during that period.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:55:06 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
