imply regularity, nor of course irregularity, but merely periodicity.


It is not my intention at this time to review the many definitions of
income that are to be found in past literature. But there is one to
which I think we may profitably devote a moment's attention. It is
one that purports to be very ancient and is attributed to the very
highest authority. It claims divine origin and sanction. It is found
in the Book of Genesis (1:29) and reads:

And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which
is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a
tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

What man received under this ancient grant was the recurrent produce
of the garden. It was "to be for meat" or consumable; and
since that which was so to serve "for meat" was the seed and the fruit,
the tree, or capital, was not to be used but conserved. The ancient
chronicler's narrative seems to me to show a remarkable insight into
the true nature of income.

From the simple forms of income with which the Book of Genesis
deals or even from the later, but still ancient, notion that it consists of
"the corn on the threshing floor” or “the fullness of the wine press"
to the modern accountant's elaborate concept of income as the net
increase in the value of a proprietorship is indeed a far cry. Money
has entered in, affording us on the one hand a common denominator
for the now exceedingly various things which enter into income, but
serving on the other hand somewhat to obscure thought. For now we
have to determine whether money alone, or money and money's worth,
are income and whether things received recurrently and used but not
ordinarily measured in money are included. Thus we have Professor
Fisher who urges with convincing reasoning that true income should be
conceived of as consisting not in the money, nor in the things which
money will buy, but solely in the abstract services which property or
instruments will afford. Thus he makes true income something twice
removed from the money received. But then come the members of the
staff of the National Bureau of Economic Research who say "we do
not count as part of the National Income anything for which a price
is not commonly paid." These two recent authorities seem to stand
at two extremes.

Even before money came in there arose a great multiplication of the
things which are income. This was already true in the days when
"Adam delved and Eve span." Beside meat man early required raiment
and beside seed he now ate flesh. This we may easily ascertain
from the account of the first income tax. For is it not recorded that
Cain brought "of the fruits of the ground an offering unto the Lord,"
while Abel brought "the firstlings of his flock and the fat thereof"?