depreciated machinery entailed a capital loss. But under the monopoly
principle of obsolescence new machines will not be introduced until the
undepreciated value of the old machine will at least be covered by the
economies of the new technique. Thus progress is slowed down, and outlets
for new capital formation, available under a more ruthless competitive
society, are cut off. Capital losses which could not be avoided under rigorous
price competition can be and are avoided under an economic system more
closely integrated by intercorporate association and imperfect competition.
If we are to save the one remaining outlet for private capital formation,
deliberate action of a far bolder character than hitherto envisaged must be
undertaken in order to make the price system and free enterprise sufficiently
responsive to permit at least that measure of capital formation to which the
rate of technological progress had accustomed us in the past.
Yet even though this much were achieved, it is necessary to recognize that
such a rate of progress would not provide sufficient investment outlets to
give us full employment of our resources. With a stationary population we
could maintain as rapid a rise in per capita real income as that experienced in
the past, by making annually only half the volume of new investment to
which we have been accustomed. A volume of investment adequate to provide
full employment could give us an annual percentage increase in per
capita output greatly in excess of any hitherto attained.
Various measures have been offered to maintain full employment in the
absence of an adequate rate of technological progress and of the development
of new industries. Consumption may be strengthened by the relief
from taxes which drain off a stream of income which otherwise would flow
into consumption channels. Public investment may usefully be made in human
and natural resources and in consumers' capital goods of a collective
character designed to serve the physical, recreational and cultural needs of
the community as a whole. But we cannot afford to be blind to the unmistakable
fact that a solution along these lines raises serious problems of economic
workability and political administration.

How far such a program, whether financed by taxation or by borrowing,
can be carried out without adversely affecting the system of free enterprise is
a problem with which economists, I predict, will have to wrestle in the
future far more intensely than in the past. Can a rising public debt owned
internally be serviced by a scheme of taxation which will not adversely affect
the marginal return on new investment or the marginal cost of borrowing?
Can any tax system, designed to increase the propensity to consume by means
of a drastic change in income distribution, be devised which will not progressively
encroach on private investment?"

As so often in economic life, we are confronted by a dilemma. Continued
**T

' Joseph J. Spengler, "Population Movements, Employment, and Income," Southern
Econ. Jour., Oct., 1938.**
