unemployment on a vast scale, resulting from inadequate private investment
outlets, could be expected sooner or later to lead straight into an all-round
regimented economy. But so also, by an indirect route and a slower process,
might a greatly extended program of public expenditures. And from the
standpoint of economic workability the question needs to be raised how
far such a program can be carried out in a democratic society without raising
the cost structure to a level which prevents full employment. Thus a chal-
lenge is presented to all those countries which have not as yet submitted to
the yoke of political dictatorship. In one of our round tables we are discuss-
ing divergencies in the success of governmental spending in democratic
countries and in totalitarian states. Totalitarian states have the great ad-
vantage that they can rigorously check the advance of costs, including wage
rates, while engaging in an expansionist program of public investment.
Democratic countries cannot in modern times escape from the influence
exerted by organized groups upon the operation of the price system. From
the standpoint of the workability of the system of free enterprise, there
emerges the problem of sovereignty in democratic countries confronted
in their internal economies with powerful groups-entrepreneurial and
wage-earning which have robbed the price system of that impersonal and
non-political character idealized in the doctrine of laissez-faire. It remains
still to be seen whether political democracy can in the end survive the
disappearance of the automatic price system.
Thus we are confronted with various alternatives. On the one side, there
is the proposal to risk a negative governmental policy in the expectation
that the recuperative forces to which we have long been accustomed will,
in the absence of political interference, re-assert themselves. On the other
side, there is the proposal to go forward under full steam with unrestrained
governmental expansion until full employment has been reached. Those
who have no doubts whatever about the correctness of their economic
analyses will not hesitate to make a bold choice of policy. But others, im-
pressed with the stubborn economic realities of a rapidly changing world, on
the one side, and the frailties of human nature in its power to make the
appropriate adaptation to change, on the other, will not be so sure, and
may prefer to take a course that risks neither a negative policy nor a break-
down of collective management.
With respect to the permissible rôle of public expenditures, I should like
to suggest that the problem might usefully be posed in terms of the national
income. In 1929 our national income was about $80,000,000,000. Taking
account of the prevailing lower level of prices, on the one side, and the
additions to the labor force, on the other, we may perhaps set the income
which should currently give us approximately full employment at about
$80,000,000,000. At the bottom of the Great Depression the national in-
come had fallen from $80,000,000,000 to $40,000,000,000. So drastic