habit of exalting the horn of "the professors," and of vindicating
scientific opinion as against economic opportunism. But this time the
issues have been larger, the alternatives sharper, the penalties costlier.
It will be surprising if the rebound is not greater.
Political economy reached its heyday in the decade following the
Napoleonic struggle. It did so because great economic and social
problems the dislocation of world upheaval-pressed imperatively
for settlement upon a world disillusioned by bitter experience as to the
wisdom of its practical men, and expectant in the light of justified
forecast as to the reasoning of its economic thinkers. Public opinion.
became sensible as never before that the principle of general
causation figured in the business of getting a living; that times
were bad not merely by chance; that high prices, falling exchanges,
agricultural distress, industrial unemployment, burdensome
taxes, resulted from the pursuit or from the neglect of positive policies;
that a group of inoffensive tractarians, then barely beginning to call
themselves "political economists," had given specialized study to such
matters and had time and again sounded warning note, and that therefore
it might be a prudent thing to learn what this was about and to
pay some greater regard to the spokesmen.

So, too, in the later aftermath of another cataclysm the world
stands, irresolute and hesitant perhaps, but none the less receptive
for economic counsel. The public mind is in scapegoat-making mood
―and the empiricist is its sin-offering. As false priests are expelled
from the temple, new ones will be installed. Tested as acolyte, the
economist awaits induction.

V

Uninfluential in formative policy, uncompromising as scientific protestant,
vindicated by outright event, to be acclaimed as guide and
prophet—the spiral holds. One final phase remains-relapse into
formalism. Will the parallelism obtain even here? Shall we be witnesses
to, even participants in, another classical political economywith
all the excesses that the term implies?

The answer turns upon the degree to which conscious purpose will
deflect the normal trend. If the economist, heady with larger place,
foregoes his birthright—the horoscope is cast. Larger practical influence,
wider popular interest, artificial rigidity of utterance, relapse
into paradox-like dicta, proneness to definite forecast, intentness upon
doctrinal vindication, dullness to new evidence—these, as a century
before, will be the stages in his undoing. From class advocacy in its