ends imposed from without, the obligation to maintain conditions of free
research and to harvest the fruits of free research is a grave and sobering
one.

Immediately pressing is a responsibility to help meet the urgent needs
of our day and our country. For this we require systematized knowledge of
the operating characteristics of the economic system we now possess, with
its puzzling and varying combination of free and restricted elements. When
the resources, the mechanisms, the potentialities of both the human and
material elements of this system are known, with a detail and accuracy far
exceeding that which we possess today, we shall have information about
means that will make us better able intelligently to appraise ends, and to
hold ends and means in just balance. The achievement of understanding
of our present economic system is our most pressing and most immediate
obligation.

In speaking of the appraisal of ends I point to a second requirement.
This is complete open-mindedness in the study of our existing economic
organization and of alternative economic arrangements. Out of this world
crisis will come further change. We cannot now define the course of this
change, or the design of the economic life that is to follow. If we may not,
as economists, support this or that proposal for reconstruction, we should
be ready to test any hypothesis, to appraise any proposal for modes of
organization and methods of operation alternative to those we now possess,
whether these proposals involve major or minor changes in economic life
as we know it. No hypothesis can be ruled out, per se. And no hypothesis
can be exempt from the most rigorous testing against our given economic
means.

The two great responsibilities with which each of us is charged todayto
our continuing discipline and to the urgencies of time and place-can
best be met by the economist who serves as economist, not as defender,
advocate, disciple, or special pleader. Such impartial service is the greatest
contribution he can make to the needs of an age in crisis. I believe that
he may best hope to make that contribution if he continues to live and
work in the great tradition of western science, a tradition that means honesty
of endeavor, integrity and dignity of spirit, and the ideal of objectivity in
research.

Columbia University

FREDERICK C. MILLS
