It goes without saying that we should endeavor to cut off every
source of income which corresponds to no benefits received by so-
ciety, being careful not to overlook the less obvious ways in which
benefit may be derived; but it is clear that if the figures which I
have used at all approximate the truth the remedy for the unsatis-
factory conditions of life of the poorer portion of the population
of even the wealthiest countries must be chiefly sought, not in a
forced redistribution of national income but in the increase of their
marginal productivity, brought about by a diminution in their
number, relatively to the other factors of production, an increase
in their efficiency, and in a more intelligent use of the wealth
available.
In so far as a more equal distribution of income is effected by
methods, and the opportunities which it offers used in ways, which
increase the efficiency of those who benefit by it, without corre-
sponding loss of efficiency elsewhere, it is a distinct gain. Other-
wise it is merely a palliative, and, as the figures which I have used
indicate, a palliative of comparatively small potency. Palliatives
may be useful, even necessary, if they do not undermine the con-
stitution, but they are not a cure.
Our problem is not merely a problem in distribution. It is far
more extensive and fundamental. It is a great constructive prob-
lem in social engineering, comprising many elements, and must be
attacked along many lines of approach.
We may distinguish at least five phases.
1. The problem of individual efficiency. This is primarily a
problem of health and education in the broadest sense of the term,
involving not only our school system but the continuation of train-
ing within the shop and on the farm. Our industrial development
has been so rapid that our educational system has failed to keep
pace with it.
2. The problem of industrial organization of the readjustment
of our industrial mechanism in a manner to eliminate waste of
energy and goods, while preserving in their full strength the mo-
tive forces upon which economic progress depends.
It is in connection with this element of the problem that the
economist can render his greatest service. The chief difficulty
which faces him is the incompleteness of his knowledge of the
actual working of the existing system. A vast mass of informa-
tion has been gathered in connection with the administration of
our war activities. It is of the first importance that this should