1941]
Economics in a Time of Change
11
serving all our rights to objective, detailed appraisal, with nothing, whether
end or means, exempt from critical judgment.
The key to this apparent dilemma is to be found, I think, in the manner
in which values are to be treated. The moralist, the reformer, the protagonist
of causes, usually derives his values from without the system of facts and
events to which the values are to be applied, and for which they provide
ends. For Adolf Wagner values were set by national honor and national
interest. For Sombart values and judgments about values derive from the
individual's Weltanschauung. They lie outside the realm of science; they
are not subject to testing, to critical judgment. Values thus derived have, I
think, no place in the work of the economist. In this direction lie emo-
tionalism, partisanship, conflict, and the loss of that impartiality toward
facts, in the realm of knowledge, that is the richest heritage of our scientific
tradition. If the revolt against detachment and objectivity means the sub-
ordination of the quest for knowledge to values and objectives that are
beyond testing, it threatens the very essentials of our discipline.
I do not believe that a science can assume responsibility for choosing
among ends, and for setting up scales of preference in its discussion of the
objectives of social action, without introducing into systems of thought the
support of given ends. This is not to deprecate the maintenance of rights to
personal choice or the espousal of causes by individuals, be they poets, poli-
ticians, pedagogues or political economists. The human spirit is at its finest
in the selfless support of great causes. But the heart of science, as a method
of observation, a means to understanding, and an attitude toward the
universe, is lost when science itself becomes a protagonist of ends. This
assertion has, I believe, a timeless validity. It is not conditioned by the
affairs of the moment. There is today, however, more reason than in normal
times for a jealous preservation by economists of the independence and
objectivity that are the heart of the scientific tradition. To forsake that
tradition is to invite political control. It is to make of economics a disci-
pline subservient to the dominant political powers of the day.
In thus repudiating protagonism and partisanship I am far from propos-
ing that we close our eyes to values and value judgments. We need not and
must not be blind accumulators of knowledge irrelevant to social needs and
aims. Values and ends concern us mightily. Our attitude toward them,
however, is not that of the preacher of ethics or the social reformer. They
are part of the subject matter of inquiry, open to criticism, appraisal, pro-
visional acceptance or rejection.² For any value judgment, any setting up of
an objective of social action, is a hypothesis. Like all hypotheses it sug-
gests modes of organization, ways of utilizing things, methods of handling
the means that are open to manipulation. We should be both blind and
For a discussion of the logical bases of this approach to problems of value judgment
in scientific investigation see John Dewey, Logic, the Theory of Inquiry (New York, 1938).
2
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:52:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
