he advocates, in characteristically guarded language, that the functions
of the Railroad Labor Board be transferred to a labor division of an
enlarged interstate commerce commission, that its decisions be given
the force of law, and that railroad strikes be prohibited.
It was no accident that the same winter in which Congress passed
the Transportation act in face of the determined opposition of the
leaders of organized labor, Kansas, under the forceful guidance of
Governor Allen, adopted her Industrial Court law. This affords even
clearer evidence of the inevitable trend of governmental policy toward
labor controversies on public service industries. The Kansas act not
only creates a court with broad powers to regulate wages, hours, and
working conditions when in dispute in industries affected with a public
interest, but prescribes more clearly than the Transportation act what
standard of just and reasonable rates the court is to apply to wages
and working conditions, and prohibits with severe penalties strikes
or other concerted efforts to interrupt the continuous operation of
such industries.

It would be a bold prophet who would attempt to predict just what
developments in our governmental policy toward public service industries
lie immediately before us. In the see-saw of politics, President
Harding's recommendations may be disregarded and Governor Allen's
beloved Court may be abolished. But I venture the opinion that whatever
course the legislation of the immediate future may take, the logic
of the situation will as time goes on lead us to strengthen rather than
weaken the machinery for insuring continuous operation of public
service industries. This means the maintenance of an authoritative
board or court to determine labor conditions on the railroads and of
similar state boards or courts to determine conditions on street railways
and other local public service industries. It means the formulation
in statutes of the standards as regards wages and working conditions
that are to be required in connection with public service industries.
Finally it means prohibition with enforceable penalties (not imprisonment
but fines which pursue the offender until paid, as in New Zealand)


***Among much conflicting testimony, there seems to be general agreement that a
chief reason for the violent reaction against the Kansas law in the recent election
was the severity of the penalties imposed under it. Sending Alexander Howat
and his five associates to jail made the law seem obnoxious even to wage-earners
who had theretofore viewed it with indifference or even approval. Fines, collectible
from the future pay envelopes of employees violating the law as well as from union
treasuries, would prove in the long run a more efficacious means of enforcement.
The application of this new state policy to coal mining, an industry which had
long been nationally organized both on the managerial and the labor side, subjected
it in my judgment to an unfair test. Had its operation been limited to street
railways and other local public service industries, it might soon have been accepted
as a logical and proper extension of the policy which had already been undertaken,
of regulating these industries through a public service commission.**