more public-spirited workers and citizens. From the viewpoint of
employees economy and efficiency in operation and the development of
a higher type of worker must be stressed, but even more important
are liberal compensation, moderate hours, safe and sanitary working
conditions and the fullest participation by the workers in the determination
of their working conditions that is compatible with economy and
efficiency. Finally from the viewpoint of employers the desiderata
are continuous operation, maximum economy and efficiency, low labor
costs, and ready acceptance by the employees of changes deemed by
the management to be necessary to the good of the business.
Economy and efficiency of operation are desirable ends to the public,
to employees and to employers. Which type of organization, company
unions or trade unions, is likely to contribute the more to economical
and efficient operation? There can be little question that judged by
this test company unions are superior. Limited in membership to the
employees of the business organization which they serve, they readily
develop an interest in and a loyalty to that organization which tend
to increased efficiency. Since the questions discussed and the conditions
to be regulated all relate to the one organization, the employee
representatives, and through them the rank and file, soon acquire a
knowledge of the production problems with which the employer is
struggling, realize their community of interest with him in solving these
problems successfully and develop that coöperative attitude that is
bound to follow from such realization.

By contrast trade unions, including in their membership employees!
not of one organization only but of as many competing organizations
throughout the country as can be induced to join, inevitably stress the
opposition of interest between their members and the business organizations
they serve. The very reason for their existence is the conviction
that the interests of employers and employees are opposed.
It is not by promoting economy and efficiency that they hope to benefit
their members but by bringing organized pressure to bear upon the
employers. The preamble of the constitution of the American Federation
of Labor, and the preambles of nearly all of the affiliated trade
unions, emphasize the contentious aspect of the relationship between
employers and employees. As the Federation's constitution phrases
it: "Whereas a struggle is going on in all the nations of the civilized
world between the oppressors and the oppressed of all countries, a
struggle between the capitalist and the laborer which grows in intensity
from year to year and will work disastrous results to the toiling
millions if they are not combined for mutual protection and benefit, it
therefore behooves," etc. Starting with this analysis of industrial
relations, the officials of American trade unions might be expected
to be even more belligerent in their attitude toward employers than in