west by the home-making husbandmen who fenced in the range and
plowed up the pasture land. The picturesqueness of this phase of frontier
life has given to the cowboy an importance in story and literature
which he never possessed in real life. Today there remain only a few
faded remnants in out-of-the-way places of the fast-riding ranchers.
The miners' frontier on the whole moved westward, but it knew no
law and jumped from one new mining district to another, zigzagging
in drunken fashion from Pennsylvania coal and iron to Missouri lead
and to Michigan copper, taking a flying leap to California when gold
was discovered there, but jumping back to Pennsylvania to exploit the
petroleum deposits. Then the precious metals called again to Colorado
and Nevada, and the much more useful iron beckoned to Minnesota.
Such a frontier cannot be neatly mapped and charted, but it had such
distinctive features that the mining camps have given flavor and picturesqueness
to our literature and geographical nomenclature.

The true westward movement was carried on by the farmers. It was
they who filled up the open spaces, took over the land, built homes and
other improvements, and steadily pushed back the border of settlement.
The rapidity and scope of this movement were unprecedented in history.
In the single decade 1870-1880 there were added to the cultivated area
of the United States over 190,000,000 acres, or a territory equal in extent
to Great Britain and France combined, while in the following twenty-
year period 1880-1900 the farm area was increased by 305,000,000
acres. This was equal in extent to the rest of Europe, excepting Spain.
In 1890 the Superintendent of the Census announced that the frontier
had disappeared. Defining the frontier as an area where the population
was less than two per square mile, he presented figures in the census of
that year to show that the population was everywhere more dense than
that minimum, and therefore concluded that the land was now solidly
settled from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, and that the last frontier
had been eliminated from our history. This was a statement of profound
significance, for it presaged the end of free land, the lure of
which had dotted the western plains with homesteaded farms; and it indicated
that the great task of the American people that of subduing a
continent to the uses of man-was now completed.

But was the Superintendent of the Census correct in claiming that
the frontier had disappeared?

Whatever may have been true of the physical advance of the population
and the appropriation and exploitation of the public domain, it is
clear to us today as we look back to the decade of the 1890's that in
many respects and in many branches of human achievement the frontier
had only been visioned, but not conquered. This was the decade of bitter
debate and serious struggle over the establishment of the gold standard,