The Nature of Our Economic Problem
9
1920]
doubtedly greatly increased for city laborers, while food has risen
relatively to the average.
In certain directions even the lower paid portions of the manual
laboring class have made great gains. Their freedom of move-
ment and communication have been immensely increased. They
can acquire the foundations of an education. Through the unifica-
tion of the industrial system of the world they have escaped the
danger of recurring periods of extreme hardship due to local.
scarcity. They are offered a much larger variety of goods from
which to choose and enjoy certain comforts and luxuries unknown
a century and a half ago. But the increase in their productive
power measured in the goods essential to life has been compara-
tively small.
The rapid expansion of the industry of the world has been
made possible by an apparently inexhaustible supply of low paid
labor, constantly keeping pace with the demand, with the result
that a large part of the population of even the wealthiest coun-
tries is living close to the margin of existence. Owing to their
number and the lack of individual efficiency their marginal pro-
ductivity has been low.
So far as this low marginal productivity is attributable to ex-
cessive numbers, conditions have been temporarily, at least, altered
by the war. There are probably ten million fewer laborers in the
western industrial world today than there would have been if
there had been no war. This condition, particularly if it is ac-
companied by an increase in individual efficiency, a rapid accumu-
lation of capital, and a stimulus to invention, offers the possi-
bility of the creation of a new standard of life sufficiently strong
to control the birth rate and a consequent permanent increase in
the marginal productivity and earning power of manual laborers.
As yet, however, this is only a possibility.
Apparently before the recent fall in the value of money only
about 4 per cent of the families in this country received an in-
come in excess of $3,000 and seven tenths of one per cent an in-
come in excess of $10,000.
The success of this small minority and the very large incomes
received by a very few have raised the standard of what is re-
garded as a decent and healthful condition of life, have empha-
sized inequality and bred unrest and discontent. More than this,
it has set standards of extravagant expenditure all too readily,
even if naturally, imitated by the manual laborer whenever his
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
