1941]
Economics in a Time of Change
3
economic phenomena. Under this scrutiny there has been revealed, not
an economic universe of simple and relatively unchanging attributes, but a
world bristling with variation and pulsing with change. This revelation
makes, I think, for health in our discipline, and is promising for the
ultimate future. But it does not make for a sense of complete adequacy,
when we set our tools of thought against the tangled confusions of economic
reality.
Shifts over time are a phase of the complexity we face when we center
attention on phenomena. Such shifts are always occurring. Our present
troubles in seeking to understand and interpret economic life are intensi-
fied by revolutionary alterations in economic institutions and processes.
After a long century of relative order, comparative security and slow secular
modification of the ways of social life, these ways are now being swiftly
altered. Social habits and political systems which to the preceding generation
seemed virtually immutable are, for millions, subject to over-night trans-
formation. The slow tempo of evolution, in terms of which our fathers
thought of social change, appears to have given way to short-order re-
construction of the systems by which men live. Of course, this sense of rapid
change is in some degree illusory. Staggered by the dizzy pace of life in
the world of headlines and radios we lose sight of the more enduring
features of the real world. When time brings a truer perspective, the actual
modifications of institutions and ways of living will perhaps appear less
revolutionary. But with due allowance for illusion, we may expect the
events of recent months and years to affect us profoundly.
Economic change, striking national and world economies with uneven
incidence, produces a welter of discrepant forms. This is true even in our
own relatively sheltered state. Domestically we have a complex mixture of
elements in our economy, with units of private enterprise, partially reg-
ulated enterprise, closely controlled enterprise and publicly administered
enterprise struggling toward mutual adjustment and harmonious interwork-
ing. The competitive elements of contemporary economic life have not
been effectively integrated with the regulated and controlled elements.
There result diversity in administrative forms and friction in the relations
among economic elements. These make more difficult the task of under-
standing.
In the international sphere disturbances have been more pronounced.
Even before the most recent breakdown, international economic relations
were sharply at variance with the ideal of a free world economy. Today
there is no world order. The laws of trade in a free world market have
little meaning in an era of economic autarchy, with such trade as is not on
a barter basis hedged about by a host of restrictions. The body of economic
doctrine dealing with the international movements of goods and means of
payment when commerce is unfettered-one of the truly impressive crea-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:52:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
