policies. New economic experiments and inventions were made, some of
which constituted real pioneering in the field of human welfare. The new
schools of economists began to insist that their science be not treated
in vacuo, but that it meet the present needs of the factory, the market
place, and the home. The brilliant work of the physicists, the chemists,
and the biologists in conquering the forces of nature compelled the
economists and their allies to face the still more vital problems of social
engineering.
Here is a new frontier. Like every other frontier it was at once a
barrier and a challenge. The general and ready acceptance by the world
of the benefits of science, and the increasing reliance by men of affairs
upon the technologists, inclined them to accept the guidance of those
among the economists or their followers who proclaimed themselves
leaders. Armed with statistical charts and price curves these announced
a new era of prosperity, but the event proved that the advance had not
been along scientific lines. Economic science may be richer by the ex-
perience of the past three years, but the lesson was dearly bought.
In comparison with the definite and positive achievements of the
physical and biological sciences the contributions of the social sciences
to human wealth and welfare are frequently belittled. But such a judg-
ment errs in taking too short a view. It was surely a daring step in
social experimentation for a generation trained in mercantilist theory
to rely upon free enterprise and competition as guides in the economic
sphere. And the industrial system created during the nineteenth century
has on the whole served the people well, though sometimes the engineer
veers in his course or seems to lose control of the engine. Credit in full
measure may be claimed for much of the economic progress already
achieved, such as the great increase in productivity, the improved stand-
ard of living of the mass of the people, shorter hours, the lessened strain
of manual labor, and the increasing emphasis upon the worth of man
and of his welfare in the economic scheme.
In the complex society of today, moreover, no single science or group
of sciences can claim a monopoly of method or of human knowledge.
Technology and economics, biology and sociology, engineering and sta-
tistics are interrelated and interdependent. Technological improvements
call for social adjustments, but the technical and engineering enterprises
in turn wait for economic wealth. Advance in one conditions progress in
the others. Economists may fairly claim that their contributions have
been significant and essential. Economic theory has, on the whole, run
ahead of business administration; there has been a lag between the dis-
covery of truth and its application by those in control of industry. But
neither physical nor social scientists can rest content with the progress
already made, which, in comparison with the unplumbed possibilities of