to prepare the way for the general European agreement embodied in
the Barcelona Convention of March, 1921.
Agreements for the suppression of the use of unfair methods of
competition in international trade have been limited, for the most part,
to the protection of patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names,
and the like. In these matters the interests of different states are not
so much joint as they are reciprocal, and they are unevenly reciprocal.
Substantial inequalities remain, particularly in the effectiveness with
which the provisions agreed to are enforced.
International agreements with respect to labor legislation may
possibly be regarded as tending toward fairer standards of inter-
national industrial competition. But that is not their chief signifi-
cance; and I can do no more than mention them here. Nor can I
discuss the important preparatory work done under the auspices of
the Economic Committee of the League of Nations on commercial
arbitration, export and import prohibitions, double taxation, and other
matters.
It will be observed that few of the operative agreements which I
have discussed thus far cut deeply into what are generally deemed to
be important national interests or have come to be symbols of national
prestige. None of them, to put it concretely, has much news value.
The history of the international agreements that have sought really
to limit the scope of international commercial “strategy" has been a
record of halting achievement. Like price agreements and pooling
arrangements among business concerns, such covenants appear to
remain effective only so long as that situation serves the interests of the
more important signatories. Such was the history of the Berlin act
of 1885, of the Brussels Sugar Convention of 1902, and of the Act of
Algeciras of 1906.
In the absence of general agreements, the international economic
relations of a large part of the world have been governed by a com-
plex network of bilateral commercial treaties, held together and made
at all consistent and tolerable only by most-favored-nation clauses.
The system thus set up, especially in continental Europe, was unstable;
for a single important new treaty would upset things until, by the
revision of other treaties, a condition of temporary equilibrium could
again be reached. The system was uneven; for the strong states were
able to bargain more effectively than the weaker ones. In particular,
industrial states had a more advantageous position than agricultural
states. Questions of commercial policy were recurrently projected
into the field of international politics, so that they were quite commonly
discussed in terms of Machtpolitik. Commercial treaties were regarded