that will bring the different regions together in a common policy."
But the nation, in its larger relations, is itself a section. Outside of
its own borders its interests, real or supposed, conflict with the interests
of other nations. Here statesmanship becomes sectional leadership.
The role which the statesman finds easiest to play is often one which
is assigned to him in the popular dramatization of the facts of international
economic intercourse. His task would be harder, however, if
his countrymen insisted or expected that the foreign policy of their
own government should have the same degree of design and purpose,
the same elements of plot and strategy, that they see in the foreign
policies of other states.

There is a modern animism which imputes malign intent, not to the
forces of nature, but to personified "nations." The preposterous
myth that Pan-Germanism was a definite national policy could not have
found lodgment except in minds patterned to receive it. In a newspaper
which lies before me as I write, there is a short dispatch telling
that a new German company has been organized which proposes to
operate in Russia. The headline reads: "Germany Getting Grip on
Russia." Not long ago another dispatch told of a rather notable
increase of some relatively unimportant German exports to Sweden.
The headline and an introductory paragraph interpreted this ordinary
incident of trade as meaning that Germany was getting "control" of
Swedish markets. And when it is not Germany it is England or Japan
or some other country. A clipping bureau, I suppose, could supply
hundreds of such items each year. No one country has a monopoly of
these childish absurdities. Running through the pre-war files of an
important German commercial journal I found an astonishing number
of references to the "conquest" (Eroberung) of Latin America by the
United States; and that interpretation of our plans (not of our
achievements) is common in Latin American countries.
A good deal of what passes for information respecting the purposes
and activities of other nations is no better than malicious gossip. Such
is the character of some of the information which governments receive
through diplomatic channels. Bismarck said, "I have often not shown
dispatches from our representatives in German Courts in the highest
quarters, because they had a tendency to be piquant, or to relate and
give importance to annoying expressions or occurences, rather than to
foster and improve the relations between the two courts, so long as the
latter, as in Germany is always the case, was the task of our policy.”
But even when a government's policy is "to foster and improve
relations," no such censorship is possible over the open channels of
**F. J. Turner, "The Significance of the Section in American History," Wisconsin
Magazine of History, vol. XIII, pp. 275, 279 (March, 1925).
"Reflections and Reminiscences (Eng. transl.), vol. II, p. 248.**