The second school of thought conceives the trade union more as
an instrument of social progress, and less as a means of redressing
the balance in individual situations. The argument runs somewhat as
follows: The labor contract in recent years has become more complex
than formerly. It embraces not merely the monetary element ordinarily
known as wages but the non-monetary elements of the amount of em-
ployment, accidents, occupational disease, etc. It is primarily the
business of trade unionism to establish the conditions surrounding these
non-monetary elements in the labor contract. When these are standard-
ized for a particular trade, the strictly monetary element of wages will
need less effort. Moreover, and this is perhaps the most important part
of the argument, these non-monetary elements can ordinarily be brought
into standard form only for labor as a whole by legislative action.
The rôle of the trade union should be to experiment with and establish
these standard conditions in the non-monetary parts of the labor con-
tract. Compensation for industrial accidents and disease, standardiza-
tion of the hours of labor, unemployment insurance, old-age pensions
established and regulated by the state constitute the goal toward which
the trade union is to be the formative agency.
If the foregoing views are correct, the failure of trade unionism to
expand may be partially offset by the adoption by the American states
of systems of compulsory social insurance. To be sure, the problem
of exploited labor in certain industries seems impossible of solution in
the face of the decision of the Supreme Court that minimum wage laws
are unconstitutional. But the setting up of systems of social insurance
would enormously improve the bargaining power of labor.
The trade-union movement in the United States has in the past by no
means adopted this view of the future of the labor movement. A few
trade unions have made notable contributions in this field. The system
of old-age pensions in the printing trades, and the unemployment in-
surance scheme developed by the Amalgamated Clothing Workers have
been important experiments. It was only natural that trade-union leaders
should for so long have indulged the proud hope that the trade unions
could themselves administer adequate systems of insurance. But the
recent declarations of the American Federation of Labor can leave no
doubt that the position of American trade unionism has changed.
The greater part of the large corporations in this country have
maintained systems of old-age pensions for their employees; and some
of them have attempted to establish systems of unemployment insurance.
The need for such provision is clear to their minds. Is it not obvious to
both business men and workmen that piecemeal attempts to provide
for such contingencies as unemployment and old age fail to meet the
situation? We are dealing here with a social problem and not a problem
of an individual trade or business. The events of the past three years