21
Abbott Payson Usher
[March
of Nations. The development of the concept of evolution has exerted its
most direct influence upon economics by placing institutions in a new
light. The older writers commonly refer to the "existing" institutions,
or to the "existing" system of private property. The explicit descrip-
tions of the institutional system were thus static, and rarely is there
any positive recognition of historical process in the sense of continuous
change. Even the most devoted adherents of pure theory, today, recog-
nize the fact of historical development and the essentially dynamic
quality of the basic phenomena of economic life. We are all familiar
with secular trends, cyclical movements, and incidental fluctuations and
variations. These phenomena can now be distinguished explicitly even
though full analysis is still incomplete.
But although the basic postulates of theory have been restated in
much more sophisticated forms, they have not lost their identity. In
fact, we might even say that we are only beginning to appreciate the
full significance of the concepts of the early classical writers. The con-
cept of social evolution is deeply imbedded in their thought, despite
certain infelicities of expression and despite their failure to follow out
the implications of what was at the time a novel and unfamiliar idea.
The utilitarian concepts of Bentham and John Stuart Mill express, in
addition to many other things, a specific concept of social adaptation.
Both Bentham and Mill achieved notable concepts of an historical proc-
ess. They recognized that specific institutions may possess constructive
social significance-utility-at a particular period which they may at
a later time cease to possess because of social change. The utility of par-
ticular institutions thus becomes a criterion for the legislator in con-
sidering social policy; institutions which have lost their utility should
be discontinued, those which promise to be useful may be established
or developed. Mill's discussion of rights of property contains important
historical implications, though historical facts are not stressed at any
point. The entire discussion rests upon an explicit concept of historical
development in which the state may play an active and constructive
part.
In other respects, too, the notion of historical process appears in the
classical writing. The references to institutions are, indeed, couched in
essentially static terms, but references are made to different moments in
the process of social evolution. The process is always thought of as a
whole, and this sense of unity was so strongly felt that the writers were
not conscious of the dangers and ambiguities involved in neglecting to
distinguish between the moments of reference. In discussing such an
historical process there are three primary moments of reference that
are especially useful in abstract analysis. We may refer to the process
at its beginning, when we assume that all its content is implicit; we may
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
