21
Henry R. Seager
[March
than the formulation of far-reaching, which too often prove to be only
far-fetched, conclusions.
Public service industries may, for the purpose of this discussion, be
defined as industries whose continuous operation is vital to the public
interest. Such for illustration are local public utilities, as street rail-
ways and steam railroads.
Because the continuous operation of these industries is of vital
public concern we are beginning to develop a special public policy
toward them designed to insure uninterrupted service. This has been
the objective of our gradually unfolding railroad labor policy. In
order to judge which form of labor organization is best adapted to
such industries, we must consider the direction in which this policy
is carrying us and its probable consequences.
It took Congress many years to realize that special measures to
insure the continuous operation of the railroads were needed. When
convinced that something should be done, its first thought, registered
in the Erdman act of 1898, was that mediation, conciliation and
voluntary arbitration would suffice to prevent railroad strikes, and
for a time they did suffice. The Newlands act of 1913 attempted to
save a situation that was becoming admittedly more and more pre-
carious by providing more elaborate machinery for mediation, con-
ciliation, and arbitration. Experience soon demonstrated that some-
thing more than a change of machinery was needed. The Adamson
act of 1916 introduced, by a method and in a form that have been
generally condemned since, the principle that certain basic standards
in the railroad industry-in this instance, the standard work day-
should be determined by law. The Transportation act of 1920 further
developed this principle by prescribing that the wages and working
conditions to be established by the Railroad Labor Board, which it
created, should be just and reasonable as tested by the seven criteria
which it formulated. This act further made it the "duty” of the
railroads and their employees "to exert every reasonable effort and
adopt every available means to avoid any interruption" of the service,
but it stopped short of prescribing penalties for non-fulfilment of
this duty.
3
The recent shopmen's strike proved that Congress must do more to
prevent a tie-up of the railroads than formulate a new code of duties
for railroad men and managers. The conclusion of President Harding
as to what this more should be is significant. In his recent message
The act made the eight-hour day standard by requiring the payment of the same
wage for eight hours as had previously been paid for the longer work day, but it
did not prohibit such longer work day, nor even discourage it by requiring extra
compensation for overtime. It was thus essentially a law to increase wages rather
than effectively to establish the eight-hour day.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:39:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
