when the pioneers of sound money and good banking began through two
decades to push their toilsome way to the frontiers of the federal re-
serve system. New frontiers of large-scale manufacturing, of mechanized
industry, of more efficient mass production for the ever enlarging mar-
kets were glimpsed at this time; and far-sighted leaders began the re-
organization of industry which led them far beyond the former bounds.
A new horizon of foreign trade was opened up and the expansion of
our commerce was limited only by the failure of world demand. Some-
what more tardily, the next decade saw new frontiers pushed out in in-
tensive farming, in conservation, and in other phases of the more scien-
tific development of our resources.
But still other frontiers remained, less tangible and material, which
in the early nineties were only faintly seen afar off. The Philadelphia
Exposition of 1876 revealed to the American people for the first time
on any large scale new values of art in its various forms, higher stand-
ards of architecture, and a better appreciation of beauty. And, although
the world smiled at midwestern pretensions to culture, Chicago pushed
forward the frontiers of artistic, musical, and literary appreciation and
production both geographically and spiritually by her World's Fair in
1893. Since then the borders of this province have been extended rapidly
and steadily westward until the frontier has disappeared. It is difficult
to estimate achievement in this sphere, for no unit of measurement
exists; but, if we adopt the yardstick of the Superintendent of the
Census, we may fairly assert that today probably no place can be found
in the United States whose artistic, literary, or musical population is
less than two to the square mile.
This process of pushing out the frontiers of material achievement
inevitably affected the estimation in which some cultural values were
held. Economic success was rated higher than classical learning, and
the skill of the artisan counted for more than that of the artist. But
who shall say what scale of values should obtain on the frontier with
more authority than the frontiersman himself? Gradually, however, the
physical frontier was overcome; and, with material success assured,
the pioneer hungered for some of the less tangible goods he had left
behind. The transformation of the raw prairie into seemly homes and
beautiful cities was not accomplished in a decade or even in a generation.
Many a sprawling untidy western city today attests the difficulty of
such change. And yet in time roads and railways, mail route and tele-
graphs and telephones, court-houses and parks, motion picture palaces
and chain stores, and all the other accompaniments of American civiliza-
tion have been set up along Main Street.
Some there always were among the early pioneers who appreciated
the value of higher education and who were not content merely to trans-