VOL. XX
The
American Economic Review
MARCH, 1930
No. 1
HISTORICAL RECORDS
Presidential address delivered at Forty-second Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, Washington, D.C., December 28, 1929.
Economic history belongs to both history and economics; it seeks to be helpful
to both but to dominate neither. By its own relationship to these two disciplines it
illustrates the growing coöperation of the social sciences, of which a specific recent
example is the proposed international investigation of price history. But economic
history suffers from the defect of all history, the imperfect character of the historical
record and the various biases in its interpretation. The record tends to preserve
evidence of institutional forms, while processes of change in the ideas which underlie
institutions are much more evanescent. The increasing minuteness of modern social
recording, especially its quantitative measurements, and the new zeal in collecting
business documents, will help to complete the record for the future economic historian.
The demand for a great amplification of statistical records is a part of the con-
temporary triangulation, now proceeding, upon which to base a new development of
social controls.
If the shoemaker is well-advised to stick to his last, the learned pro-
fessions, which in our day have inherited much of the medieval crafts-
man's ethics, may occasionally obey this precept. I may properly, there-
fore, on this occasion make some random observations upon historical
records, the raw materials of my craft. Practically all the great variety
of records used by historians in general are also necessary to the eco-
nomic historian; and his technique in the use of these records is that
common to all historical criticism. But this branch of history has
chosen for its field that longitudinal section through the great mass of
material which is concerned primarily with economic activities and re-
lationships. Since the economic historian is vitally interested in the
past development of economic institutions and processes and their bear-
ing on present problems, he must also regard his work as a branch
of the science of economics. Fundamentally important, however,
as the economic factor appears to him, he does not regard it as the one
determining factor in human affairs past or present. Man does not
live by bread alone. And no active group of economic historians is
today making any such claim for the predominance of this specialism.
as did the German "historical school," from Roscher and Hildebrand to
Schmoller.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:44:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
