6
Abbott Payson Usher
[March
interest of society as a whole, and the regulation of the monopolistic
conditions almost certain to arise in the large-scale enterprises based on
these mineral deposits.
Many are disposed to question the possibility of assimilating na-
tional planning even in basic industries to the so-called "competitive"
structure of modern society. These doubts ignore many of the realities
of the industrial development of the last forty years. National planning
has long existed in important fields both in this country and in Ger-
many. If we consider the actual conditions in the iron and steel industry
of the United States since 1890, and forget for the moment all the so-
phistications created by the Sherman law and the Supreme Court, it is
fairly evident that the leaders of the industry have deliberately con-
trolled the rate of investment in the industry, the balance of facilities
for the production of the primary classes of products, and the approxi-
mate rate of annual production. We cannot legally admit that this is
the case, but such is the simplest description of what has actually taken
place. On the whole, there can be little doubt of the essential wisdom
of these arrangements and no little credit is due the industrialists and
jurists by whose ingenuity these activities were brought within the law.
In Germany, of course, the activities of the cartels and large-scale in-
dustries are still more evident, and the nationalization of various indus-
tries since the war is a notable demonstration of planning. In these fields
national planning does not really involve any bureaucratic control of
the details of industrial organization, but merely recognizes the presence
of monopoly or monopolistic competition. The normal sphere of direct
governmental activity would thus be the regulation of the monopolized
industry in the interest of the public.
The general concepts of liberalism are certainly not inconsistent with
an extension of regulated monopoly to transportation and to the pro-
duction of oil, coal, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, and electricity. Both
England and Germany are already far in advance of us in respect of
the development of interconnected production and distribution of elec-
tricity. The policies of these countries are certainly more consistent with
liberal principle than the policy or absence of policy that has until the
present year characterized our activities in these fields.
Closely associated with these problems is the question of the nature
of the rights of private property. Wild-cat oil production has been
defended in this country for two generations because any interference
with the individual would constitute a confiscation of property. This
reasoning ignores entirely some of the simplest aspects of comparative
jurisprudence. There is no general principle of law by which surface
rights are inevitably extended to underlying minerals. In Spanish colonial
law all property in minerals vested in the crown. All persons were en-
titled to search for minerals, and authorized to exploit minerals dis-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:48:54 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
