1934]
Constructive Statecraft
3
refer to our own present, when much development has taken place,
though many features of the entire system are incomplete and imperfect;
or, using our imagination, we may refer to the ultimate achievement of
the full content of the process, when we presume that all the imper-
fections and inadequacies have been overcome and the system stands
forth in its full perfection.
The assumption that economic generalizations were valid throughout
the historical period rested upon the concept of the unity of the process
of institutional development. The ultimate achievement was taken to be
no more than an expression of relationships which exist at all times and
places irrespective of the institutional devices required for their mani-
festation. With such assumptions it was obviously a matter of indiffer-
ence whether abstract analysis concerned itself with the bare relations
implicit in social life or with their objective manifestation in a fully
developed institutional system. One might discuss either the economic
phenomena of primitive society or the operations of the perfected sys-
tem of private property and contract which would ultimately emerge
when the obsolete survivals of the feudal order had been entirely elimi-
nated by liberal reform.
This position had elements of logical significance. But there was little
positive defense for the common presumption that the process as a whole
could be thought of as the existing order. To assume that the given mo-
ment could be identified with the ultimate end of the process, involved
the tacit assumption that the process was already approximately com-
plete, so that the developments of the future were really negligible. This
is a dangerous assumption, but it is by no means an uncommon tendency
of idealists. The imagination is not so severely taxed if it seems certain
that the consummation of all hopes is awaiting "just around the corner."
The nineteenth century liberals were thinking in terms of a final achieve-
ment of the free society in the immediate future.
Underlying all these confused references to the history of institutions
there was thus a positive concept of evolution that was truly remark-
able. For most of these notions appeared before there was any syste-
matic theory of social evolution. Accordingly, we are justified in feeling
that the explicit development of the theory of social evolution is no more
than a working out of ideas which were significantly present in the clas-
sical writing. There is positive continuity of thought.
The transition from the early form of liberal doctrine to the latter
form involves only two new elements. We must recognize that we can-
not refer indifferently to any particular moment in the process as if it
stood for the whole. Although we may properly discuss the phenomena
at any stage, and although our discussions will have some significance
for the analysis of the process in its entirety, each of the various mo-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:45:52 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
