1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
13
be made available and systematically utilized. In connection with
the administration of the income and excess profits taxes there is
also being gathered information which promises to be of great
value. But we must go farther than this. In coöperation with
the statistician we must work out a more adequate and better co-
ordinated statistical service, and those in whose hands lie the con-
trol and direction of our industrial system must furnish much
more complete information concerning the operation and results
of the enterprise which they direct. We now require such infor-
mation based on prescribed and uniform systems of accounting
from certain enterprises regarded as quasi-public in character.
The field covered by such reports, as well as their scope, must be
gradually extended. Information regularly collected over a
series of years is far more valuable than that furnished by spas-
modic investigations of particular industries, conditions in which,
for one reason or another, attract public attention at the moment.
If there is one fact rather than another which the war has made
clear, it is the fact of the solidarity of our industrial system. In-
dustry has become socialized, not as the result of any conscious
purpose but by the working of economic forces. As it is organ-
ized today, there is really no such thing as private industry in
the sense in which that term has been used in the past. What we
call private industry is privately managed public industry and
if that system is to endure those who hold positions of responsi-
ble control must be willing to render a full and regular account
of their stewardship.
We need also special investigations which will be valuable in
proportion as they are scientifically conceived and carried out
and are directed to the solution of specific problems.
3. The problem of securing harmonious and effective coöpera-
tion between the factors which make up the individual industrial
establishment.
4. The problem of maintaining such a balance of the factors of
production that the marginal productivity of no class of the popu-
lation need fall below what is required for the maintenance of a
healthful existence.
In a country like ours, subject to a large immigration, this is
partly a problem of statesmanship, partly a problem of parental
responsibility.
5. The problem of the rational use of the wealth we are able
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
