compromise than are some of the other incentives to human conduct.
Accordingly, men who are governed by the desire for gain are more likely
to find it to their interest to seek some other way out of an economic
contest than that which leads to armed conflict. If we may be permitted
to parody one of Smith's famous passages we may say: it is not from
the benevolence of the business and financial magnates that we expect
peace to be maintained but from their regard to their own interest.
In these post-war days when the recollection of the destructiveness of
the last war is still fresh in our minds and governments are being urged
to leave no stone unturned to prevent a renewal of conflict; when nations
are pledging themselves to renounce war as an instrument of interna-
tional policy; when conferences for naval reduction and for the settle-
ment of reparation difficulties are causing alternating hopes and dis-
appointments in the minds of those who have the will to peace, it is pos-
sible that those meetings less heralded whose determinations are often
concealed from the public, which the representatives of private business
corporations frequently hold to settle such problems as the control over
fuels, power and raw materials and the division of the world's markets
for certain commodities, are doing more to lay the foundations of inter-
national peace than are the more spectacular efforts of our statesmen.
In spite of much which has been written in support of the widely-held
opinion that economic causes are those most often responsible for war,
this view of the matter seems to have been greatly exaggerated and is
contrary to that held by the sociologists who have given most attention
to the subject of conflict. The struggle to command industrial resources
or markets may indeed produce friction among nations and powerfully
support other motives for war, but economic differences taken by them-
selves are more likely to be settled by peaceable means than are inter-
national disputes arising from other motives.
It is not the contention of this paper that international economic
competition is self-regulating; that it can be relied upon to prevent
war through the national self-interests involved, any more than the self-
interests of individuals can be expected to check exploitation of the weak
by the strong. Some government action will probably always be neces-
sary to check monopolistic price-making by international combinations
as it has been required to limit the efforts to create domestic monopolies.
But the claim is here made that international competition within the
economic sphere is less dangerous and less likely to be destructive than
are racial and cultural conflicts. Furthermore, it is claimed that the
economic struggle among nations is itself a force which makes for inter-
national peace.
It is true that at times certain governments have given their support
to the forces of monopoly at work in their own dominions, when such