inevitable "natural rivalries." The facts, however, suggest that
though there may be a vaguely circumscribed field of potential rivalries,
within that field competitive alignments are free to arrange themselves
in various patterns, while one thing or another may come to be adopted
as an emblem of success.

In the larger field of international economic rivalries group
psychology retains its characteristics. The world in which national
groups strive to realize their opposed interests is in large part a
world of man-made patterns and symbols. It is a new world, for
nations as we know them are only a few hundred years old—no older
than the new world-commerce which helped to bring them into being and
which remains one of the fields in which their oppositions and rivalries
feed and grow.

Among the architects of this world have been the historians. They
have played a role not unlike that of the contemporary newspaper
annalist of competitive sports. Most histories have been histories of
nations. By abstracting the nation from the other forms which human
relations take, by emphasizing the peculiar and differentiating elements
in a nation's institutional heritage, they inevitably deepen the
cleavages between national groups. Many histories have put disproportionate
emphasis upon wars. And in explaining wars they have
often put more reliance upon "economic motives" than either economics
or psychology would warrant.

"It is possible to study a multitude of histories," says John Dewey,
"and yet permit history, the record of the transitions and transformations
of human activities, to escape us. Taking history in separate
doses of this country and that,. . . . we miss the fact of history and also
its lesson; the diversity of institutional forms and customs which the
same human nature may produce and employ. An infantile logic, now
happily expelled from physical science, taught that opium put men to
sleep because of its dormitive potency. We follow the same logic in
social matters when we believe that a war exists because of bellicose
instincts; or that a particular economic regime is necessary because
of acquisitive and competitive impulses which must find expression. . .
We have constructed an elaborate political zoölogy as mythological
and not nearly as poetic as that other zoölogy of phoenixes, griffins,
and unicorns. Native racial spirit, the spirit of the people, or of the
time, national destiny are familiar figures in this social zoo.
As names

for effects, for existing customs, they are sometimes useful.
for explanatory forces they work havoc with intelligence."
we may add, do such names as economic motives and the
**causes of war.

Human Nature and Conduct, pp. 110-112.

As names

And so,

economic**
