chances of survival were improved when he compromised with some of
his adversaries and even sought their coöperation in waging war on the
more unrelenting and destructive of their mutual enemies. Such compromises
and alliances were, of course, most likely to take place with human
beings themselves, and born of such toleration and alliances came
some of our earliest social groupings. Not all groups were formed with
economic ends in view; but, whenever mutual aid could be secured by a
specialization of functions and a division of labor within the group, a
continuation of the tolerant attitude was most likely to result.
Conflict, it is to be noted, did not cease even within the group; but it
took on a more creative and less destructive form. Under the name
of competition it came to be thought of as a stimulating and constructive
force in human society; and among economists by the time of Adam
Smith competition was believed to be wholly beneficial. It was thought,
indeed, that it might even be relied upon as a sufficient regulator of man's
conduct in the world of commerce and industry.

If today we have ceased to accept the naïve argument that competition
is wholly a stimulating, never a destroying, force in our economic
life, it is not because we do not believe that competition can be made to
serve in the stimulating way in which Smith and his followers contended
that it would act. When it fails, it is because the competitors do not
possess equal strength and foresight and the stronger and more foresighted
are likely to insist that their individual interests are those of the
group. The weaker members are then obliged to combine in order to
restrain competition and prevent it from destroying both itself and them.
Such restraints are most frequently obtained by enlisting the support of
organizations based on non-economic motives, especially that of the
State whose functions are not only political but which usually represents
in its governing policy the ethical notions prevailing at the time. It is
not, therefore, through a cessation of conflict that unfair economic
competition is checked but by bringing into play another form of competition
that the equilibrium is restored.

While we may readily admit that economic competition needs at times
to be controlled in its own interest, that is, in order to preserve that
freedom which is its very foundation stone, it is equally true that economic
forces are at times called upon to preserve society from modes of
conflict which have their origin in other than economic motives, where
the struggle is more harmful and unless checked will completely destroy
the weaker contestants. More than once has the economic boycott
been resorted to by nations which were weak in armed forces to check the
aggressive political ambitions of their more warlike neighbors. Such
boycotts may have proved ineffective in restraining for any long time.
the purchase of the offending commodities; but they have usually produced