remiss if we failed to explore leads to various forms of organization al-
ternative to the one that may exist at a given time, to use alternative models
as aids in the examination of existing institutions. It is the function of
ideas concerning ends and ultimate values to suggest the nature of such
alternative methods of utilizing resources and satisfying wants. These
alternatives are then subject to examination in which all the interrelations of
means to ends and of ends to means are explored. And this exploration is
a task in which complete detachment and full objectivity are essential ele-
ments. It is not a task for the impassioned protagonist. Anguish and art,
says Irwin Edman, are not identical. Neither, I may add (and my jagged
meters perhaps accord with my subject), neither are emotional perturba-
tion and political economy identical.
In defending the necessity of objectivity in economic research, I have
spoken in abstract terms. Yet here, too, means and ends may not be dis-
sociated. Impartiality and independence have a further sanction in that
they contribute directly to the fruitfulness of research and the extension of
knowledge. The data of economic research today are in many repositories-
the files of industrial corporations, the books of banks and public utilities,
the records of organized labor, the documents of accountants, the archives of
government. Economics can be given life and substance if it can draw on all
these sources for the facts on which it must build. These sources are open
to us only when there is mutual confidence in the possibility of disinterested
study. We have before us today many examples of coöperation, in re-
search, of individuals of diverse economic interests and, indeed, of widely
differing opinions as to what is desirable in economic organization. Make
research a tool of special interests, make the driving motive the attainment
of my particular Utopia, or yours, reject objectivity and impartial work-
manship as the means to advance knowledge, and the possibility of such
coöperation is lost.
My talk tonight has been shop talk. I have discussed some of the elements
of uncertainty in our discipline today, some of the difficulties we face in
seeking a better understanding of the means by which men live. The mere
variation of experience creates some of these difficulties. The confusions
and needs of a troubled time have put phenomena, in all their diversity,
at the center of economic attention. Satisfaction with the unity and logical
coherence of systems of economic thought is to some extent impaired when
the bewildering variety of things and events is set against these conceptual
systems.
Difficulties growing out of a keener appreciation of the complexities of
economic reality have been intensified by profound and accelerated change.
I mean, now, not changes on the intellectual level, such as those that revolu-
tionized biological thought eighty years ago, or those that recast the founda-
tions of the physical sciences in the early years of this century. These