as disinterestedly, coöperate in common tasks as loyally, think as straight
within their own special fields of competence, as does the ordinary run
of college professor. They certainly do not live on the moral heights continuously,
but they are called upon more often than academic men to rise
to them, and, in my honest judgment, they respond to the call as often
and as fully as in all probability we ourselves should under like circumstances.


In one respect in particular, of special interest to economists, I have observed
them with ever-increasing admiration—namely, their patience and
generosity in their dealings with their economic advisers. In the course of
expounding the economic verities, the economists repeatedly expose their
divided counsels. They especially reveal that conflict within their ranks
between ancient dogmas and resurrected or newly-invented heresies with
which much of the remainder of my talk will deal. Those officials who
come into frequent contact with squads of economists, as they note the
repeated conflict of testimony, must feel at times like the English judge
who remarked that he had for years been trying motoring cases in which
two cars, each of them on the right side of the road and each of them
stationary, had been involved in a head-on collision—or even like that
magistrate in a native court in Ceylon who, disgusted by the flagrant
contraditions in the evidence of the successive witnesses, said to the officer
of the court: "Call the next liar." This failure of the economists to speak
as with one voice is a severe trial for the officials. I suspect, however,
that they would find us even more trying if, when unpalatable advice was
offered by one economist, they could not feel that there was a good chance
that with a little search another economist could be found happy to swear
that the advice which had been given was incredibly bad economics, or even
was "orthodox" or "sound" economics, which are now very forceful epithets
indeed in some high quarters.

To proceed with my catalogue of the handicaps of the economic theorist
as a policy-maker. The economists of my generation and earlier were
trained to concentrate on so-called long-run analysis in their pure theorizing.
When they ventured into the discussion of questions of public policy,
they accordingly tended to be preoccupied with the long view, with the
effects which a given action would have on the more distant future, and
to disregard or to weigh lightly its more immediate effects. A good illustration
of what I have in mind is the famous poor-law controversy in
England in the 1830's. The leading economists of the time all emphasized
the allegedly injurious effects on the productive capacity and the will to
work and to save of the poor which would result from generous, longsustained,
and assured poor-relief to the able-bodied. They stressed even
more the growth of population and the consequent impairment of the
basic earning power of labor which they believed would ultimately result