80
T. S. Adams
[March
Among other and conflicting dictionary definitions of the word.
"ideal" one finds this: "a standard of desire; an ultimate object or
aim, a mental conception of what is most desirable." Are such ideals
helpful in the field of taxation?
My experience, I confess, has led me to distrust even such ideals,
attractive though they may be to the scholar or ambitious statesman.
Laissez-faire; the socio-political ideal of Adolph Wagner; capital accu-
mulation as seen by Ricardo; conscription of capital as advocated by
idealistic economists at the beginning of the war; or “work and save”
so confidently proclaimed in the years immediately following the war-
what sorry and discredited pole-stars they are! Life's real economic
objectives are infinitely more subtle and lie infinitely beyond such proxi-
mate stars, even if they be stars.
This I do believe: The world needs the economist's version of the
truth when it is fashioned after mature study. But let the economist
cherish no illusion that it will prevail; that belief is merely a bit of
intellectual arrogance with which the scholar quiets the growling of his
own particular form of inferiority complex. The economist's "truth"
is only one factor in the contest we call taxation. He little knows when
he launches it, on what side it will eventually fight, or in what un-
suspected ways and places it will count and tell. Wearing the white.
armor of "science," it will fight side by side with grimy forces seeking
their own so-called selfish ends. It will emerge from the contest a
battered and a better truth. It will have gained from, as much as
it will have given to, its fellow contestants. It will have proved to be
no better and no holier than many of its fellows. It will have proved
more effective, the more completely its author-the economist—recog-
nized in advance its limitations, its functions, and the character of the
other contestants.
Contest is not only inevitable, but essential in the determination of
economic truth. There is no true political economy which does not
contemplate action. Thinking is only the beginning of wisdom; action
is essential to its consummation. The economist's "truth" as it emerges
from the closet, is largely hypothesis. It must be refined and tested in
the laboratory of life. The complete economist will have taken his part
in tax-making and have felt the buffeting of the game. He will have
done this not only as citizen and man, but as economist. True wisdom
cannot be purchased at a lesser price. Without it he may possibly be
a statistical or social scientist, but he can never be an economist in the
field of taxation.
Yale University
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:43:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
T. S. ADAMS
