don't get it. But further I hold with the practical working necessity
of competition, and of competition within, as well as without, the economic
field-only that also I seem to myself to know that it is not all
wholesome, and that some of its unregulated workings are pernicious
and extremely dangerous, not merely directly to the general welfare
but to the very perpetuity of competitive institutions. A regulated
competition I take to be imperative, if competition is to be and to remain
a tolerable system. Successful competitive institutions, I hold,
require an intelligent guidance, which, so far, they have measurably
lacked, and in that lack have seriously and essentially suffered. The
most dangerous menace to the competitive order I take to be with those
partisans of it who resist resolutely all change or amelioration of it.
There is a better service. Lowell, we recall, could best attest his love
of his country by his intense loathing of its shame. I hold, as for that
matter do also the Guild Socialists, that no system, thoroughgoing and
systematically noncompetitive, could be tolerable at all. But the competitive
system needs to be made tolerable and, as I hold, can be made
tolerable, but not by the method of eliminating all coercive regulation
and restriction of it.

Essential, therefore, to the success of those voluntary coöperations
that are the characteristic traits of competition are the compulsory cooperations
that are in ultimate principle socialistic. Government, for
whatever there is of it, is so far an expression of the collective principle.
Believing, therefore, in the present order of society in its general
outlines, I believe also in the limited acceptance of the socialistic
principle. To get along without government-a systematic and unlimited
individualism, the competitive principle at its utmost extension
-I esteem as little as a government coercive over the entire economic
field, an unlimited and systematic collectivism.

So much as this, however, is obviously neither a radical nor a conservative
pronouncement. Instead, it is a mere commonplace of practical
policy. In the very institution of government the commonsense
of the world has recognized the necessity of limitations imposed on individual
activities, gain getting as well as other. Systematic laissez
faire is as thoroughly discredited as systematic collectivism ought to
be. The antithetical principles of liberty and of compulsion are good,
each in its own place and degree. The problem is one of articulation
and of adjustment between them. Wherever the ends or the methods of
individual striving conflict with the common good, there is the sphere of
the state, restrictive or coercive. Such is the plain meaning of the law
and order jurisdiction, the enforcement of contracts, the decree of
damages against torts, the enactment of pure-food laws, the license