the past of such almost unconscious refigurement of the public mind,
as, for example, the change in opinion in England on the inclosure movement
between the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries. At times, the
great changes are initiated and carried on almost unperceived by those
who are themselves making them. Common use and wont is one of the
greatest enemies of the historical record; for ordinarily those gradual,
day-by-day changes in attitude of mind in which multitudes participate
are not observed and recorded. New concepts are diffused and slip
noiselessly into men's minds; they nestle down beside older alien concepts,
often without noticeable jostling; new practices resulting therefrom
silently emerge or old ones quietly drop away, until at some point, the
preparation becoming far advanced, the new face of the world becomes.
manifest with apparent suddenness, and the historian, casting about even
to set a date to this revolution, discovers another gap in the historical
record.

There is strong reason, therefore, at this particular juncture not
only to study attentively those hidden things which lie upon the surface
of the present, but to collect and preserve the commonplace documents
of the immediate past. Already the Business History Society is concerned
with the collection, preservation, and utilization of business documents,
not merely by its Boston headquarters, but by local historical
societies generally and especially by university and business school
libraries. Such documents as account books, letter files, reports and
other records of individual concerns, corporations, and trade associations,
above all the long-run series which for a time have been heaped in
storerooms and then destroyed, should now be preserved, sorted and
organized for study. Many of them may be had for the asking, some
under pledge of confidence for a certain number of years. What would
we not now give for a large accumulation of such material, say from Antwerp
of the sixteenth century, or from Lancashire of the eighteenth, to
add to such few documents as we possess! Yet we still permit similar
records, precious at least to our successors, to be destroyed by hundreds
of tons daily.

Towards meeting our own needs and answering our own questions
we can do something; and while we cannot imagine what questions our
successors will put to our time, nevertheless we must build for them as
well as for ourselves. It is tempting at times to meditate upon our
successors. Perhaps, two or three centuries hence, the highly trained
economists in what may at that date correspond to the Domestic Commerce
Division of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, at
Washington, may be preparing, from the great flow of current information
coming daily from all parts of the country, that perpetual inventory
of consumable resources, that delicately adjusted economic