2
J. M. Clark
[March
textbooks of principles, but writers on special subjects. . . . The number
of powerful intellects it has brought to bear on them is a remarkable phe-
nomenon. . . . In the perfection of its economic statistics America leaves Eng-
land behind." This was not written in 1935, but in 1880, by Cliffe Leslie;
and the men he names as writers on special subjects include David A. Wells,
Francis A. Walker, William G. Sumner, C. F. Dunbar and Simon Newcomb.
A few years later, Walker and Newcomb joined the ranks of the authors of
general treatises; and later still, the tone of the picture changed radically.
The great revival and expansion of American economics dates, not from
the founding of the American Economic Association, but from the end of
the Civil War. The founding of the Association marks, however, a pro-
found reorientation of the utmost importance. To understand it, one must
go back to the state of college teaching of economics half a generation
previous. The subject was typically treated as an adjunct to philosophy; and
simple and absolute "natural laws” were presented as final truths about the
economic world. Out of this schooling came a small group of young and
able students, independent enough to react against it, conscious of defects
of traditional method and shortcomings of traditional doctrine, and am-
bitious to build a better structure on sounder foundations. They went to
Germany for advanced study; and we now delight to honor them as the
Pilgrim Fathers of the new movement.
The period of over sixty years which followed may be roughly marked
off into four main movements, coming into dominance at successive pe-
riods of time, but over-lapping one another as all such movements in history
are bound to do. First came a period of preparation, orientation and gesta-
tion, lasting until approximately 1890, and including the formation of the
Economic Association. Second came the development and consolidation of
an indigenous form of the marginal economics, paralleling the develop-
ment of the Austrian economics and of Alfred Marshall's economics in
England. Third came a critical movement; and fourth, the rise to dominance
of positive types of study of diverse sorts, among which our efforts are
divided shall I say dispersed?-at the present time.
Preparation, Orientation, Gestation
The process of orientation contained much that was superficially para-
doxical. It was part of a transition of which one might flippantly say that
it gradually transformed American economists from laissez faire protection-
ists to free-traders who believed strongly in the positive function of the
State in economic life. This paradox, however, is easily explained by the
changing issues of the times. More seriously one might ponder over a
movement, largely animated by a spirit of breaking away from traditional
system theories and apparently well launched in the direction of the His-
torical School, yet the outstanding fruit of which in its first twenty years
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:50:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
