1921]
The Post-War Outlook
13
already not, however, I repeat, to national insolvency. The injus-
tices also are great enough, with the debts restricted to their present
burden. The men who forfeited positions and earning power to face
the chances of death have enough to pay if, winning out to return at
all, they repay to us stay-at-homes in cheap dollars the cheap dollars
that we advanced as support of their dangerous adventure.
And on
these terms also their children and their children's children will have
enough to pay to ours.
Conceivably, I admit, it might be good ethics-if only also it were
possible that future generations should share with the present gener-
ation the costs of a war that, in no small part, will enure to the future
advantage, even though it be also probable that these coming genera-
tions will have their own wars to fight-and, it may be, the more of
them to fight by the very fact that, vastly increased in numbers, they
must find their living in a world grievously impoverished by our own
excesses and prodigalities. But this thing-take it to be never so
just cannot be. In that future time this present generation will rank
as a past generation. Dead and departed, it can have no payments
made to it. No payments can ever be made by one generation but to
itself. It will be only the grandchildren of some of us that will get paid
at the cost of the grandchildren of others of us. Solely in the sense
of this redistributive bearing on the future, can burdens be passed on.
So far, truly, as the benefits of the war are enduring, there is a gift
by us to the future-but a gift in its nature common to the children
of all of us. But for some of these children the gift is to take on also
the quality of a pecuniary asset. The other children will pay these
first for the gift provided for all. Wisely, then, these inheritors of
debt in favor of correlatively inheriting creditor grandchildren will
adapt to their own case Lloyd-George's challenge of the British land
system: "Why are fifty millions of us Englishmen trespassers in the
land of our birth?"
Nor is this all of the truth. In large part the bonds were pur-
chased out of inflation-awarded margins of profit. The masses who
paid once in the form of these margins the money by which the profit-
makers bought the bonds will later pay in taxes the cash to meet the
accruing interest charges and finally also to retire the bonds.
I am not concerned to join issue with anyone on the question of the
practical inevitability of these enormous national debts. I admit that,
in the lack of any general understanding of their ultimate meanings
and their long effects, in the easy and improvident opportunism of
political life, and in the want of wisely brave leadership, nothing else
was credibly possible. I charge no faults of purpose anywhere. But
that the wealth of the country would not have borne whatever share of
This content downloaded from
fff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
