1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
15
operation in the increase of the common product but for the im-
provement of their own condition regardless of or even at the ex-
pense of such increase, for which they feel no sense of responsibil-
ity. Where harmony and coöperation are essential for produc-
tion, disharmony and conflict prevail, a conflict which, with the
growing complexity of our industrial mechanism and the growing
strength of labor organizations, threatens the stability of our
whole economic system.
To state the case is to suggest the remedy. Laborers must be
incorporated into the industrial scheme. They must be given the
voice and responsibility in management, and the hope of reward
for successful effort, which they have hitherto lacked. Harmony
between men engaged in a common enterprise depends upon per-
sonal contact and conference with full knowledge of the facts by
all concerned, a willingness to sacrifice momentary personal ad-
vantage to the promotion of the common interest and to submit
to discipline. Interest and a feeling of responsibility exist only
with a sense of power, of having a voice in the determination of
the methods employed to bring about the result achieved.
These statements may indicate a very inadequate social psy-
chology. Our social psychologists can fill out the picture and
teach us the nature of the human instincts with which we have to
deal. Our efficiency engineers can instruct us in the methods of
the organization of work and the adjustment of earnings; but
they must study their problem from the point of view not merely
of profits but with consideration of the permanent well-being and
harmony of interest of all concerned.
This incorporation of laborers must take place first in each in-
dustrial unit. The laborer's sense of responsibility and interest,
if it is to be a vital force, must attach itself to the establishment
in which he works. There will always remain, however, questions
affecting whole branches of industry which must be settled by con-
ference between the representatives of the employers and employ-
ees in the industry as a whole, and questions affecting the rela-
tions between different branches of industry calling for conference
between the representatives of these classes in the nation at large.
We accomplished much in the way of temporary adjustments
along these lines under the impulse of the war spirit. The peace
problem is more difficult, but if our peace spirit is equal to our
war spirit it is not insoluble.
Laborers cannot be expected to give up the advantages of or-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
