to the description and analysis of the processes of economic and social
adjustment; but the changes affect details rather than essentials. The
early identification of liberalism with the doctrine of non-interference
was due to a misconception of the process of adaptation. The restatement
of liberal doctrine is thus a correction of an unfortunate error; a
necessary enlargement of the concepts of nature and social process.
We must recognize that both individual and social adjustment is the
result of conscious effort. Although we can reconcile the achievement
of individual ends with the welfare of society as a whole, it does not
follow that general welfare can be achieved without positive thought and
effort, as a mere residual consequence of the enlightened selfishness of
individuals. It is no longer possible to accept any concept of a mechanical
self-regulating society that excludes the state as an agency of change.
The state must needs be an active participant in social process.
The recognition of such extensive fields for the activity of the state
may seem to destroy all distinction between liberalism and various forms
of nationalism and radicalism. Important differences still remain, both
in principle and practice. The liberal concept of the function of the
state and of social process is realistic. Statecraft is treated as a process
of adjustment and adaptation. The only aim is the achievement at
each moment of the greatest measure of social welfare, national and
international.

Other concepts of statecraft are frankly idealistic. The nationalist
sees only the national state as an end of social and economic policy.
The socialist sees some form of socialist state. The radical pursues
various ideals according to his lights. None of these systems of statecraft
sufficiently recognize the limitations imposed upon our conscious
action by objective circumstance. All these systems of thought assume
that society can be made to conform to some abstract ideal. The statesman
is presumed to be able to accomplish his will. Since the days of
Jean Bodin liberals have steadfastly opposed this concept of social
process. They have endeavored to demonstrate the ways in which the
development of social life and social organization are modified by external
circumstance. They have endeavored to analyze historical process and
economic phenomena, so that by the cunning of reason the laws of nature
may be made a means to our social ends. But we conquer nature only
through the understanding of her ways. Social development is not a
demonstration of the superiority of the mind over matter: conscious
activity is itself an aspect of the system of nature.
The enlargement of the concepts of historical process and of the
system of nature do not modify in any essential respect the general
issues between the liberal and the idealists. The analysis of the localization
of industry based upon liberal principles affords no grounds for