part of our industrial scheme. Mediation and arbitration were finding
use in systematized form. Collective bargaining, at least as a phrase,
had entered into business terminology. The income tax had been in-
corporated into the national revenue system. The theory of monopoly
price was definitely accepted as to the regulation of non-competitive
industry. The Federal Reserve act had repaired the glaring defects
in our banking organization. The Federal Farm Loan project gave
assurance that agricultural credit was to become available.
At our entry into the war the opportunity would thus seem to have
been present for the exercise of a large influence upon affairs. The
course of the struggle had made it evident that eventually the race
must be to the economically strongest; and the experiences of the
belligerents had shown the penalty of economic bungling.
In the physical sciences there was swift mobilization and quick tender
and ready acceptance of scientific guidance. As to the economists
there is a different story. There had been no preparedness in the three
fateful years that preceded our entry into the World War, and there
was no collective proffer after we had entered. Even more, there was
at the outset no instinctive recourse to the economist on the part of
public authority, and but slow and half-hearted requisition of his
services thereafter.
The results were twofold-both unfortunate. On the one hand,
failing systematic mobilization, a wasteful individualism prevailed.
The American economist either ate his soul out in enforced inactivity;
or, the situation becoming intolerable, accepted subordinate, often
clerical position, rather than do nothing at all. And on the other
hand, his proper rôle was taken over in part by a group of transmuted
men of affairs; in part by a corps of business technicians, distinguished
from the economic investigator by the more austere title “statistician.”
Of the whole company of American economists, including all of those
whose names we delight to honor, not a single figure was in the first
instance chosen or was thereafter permitted to exercise formative,
determining influence in the economic conduct of the war. Services
of great usefulness, of high importance, were rendered by almost every
member of our body, and I should fail lamentably in my purpose did I
seem to be insensible of this. But nowhere and at no time was the
opportunity afforded to shape and direct. And on the other hand, in
instance after instance, constructive discretion and responsible leader-
ship were vested in men whose excellencies, high as the heavens, were
yet marked by absence of those qualities which we insist distinguish the
scientifically equipped economist.
This is no light statement. But it has not been hastily conceived
nor recklessly phrased. Over and above the great company of those