be found to do their work better than their miserable selves.
James Stirling one of "the popular advisers of the middle class”-
writing a little later but reflecting a like spirit, could look forward
to a time when “the fanatical faith of the working classes in the
artificial mechanism of combination will give place to trust in the wiser,
because more natural, system of individual competition; and the hiring
of labor, like the exchange of commodities, will be set free, to be regu-
lated by the Heaven-ordained laws of Supply and Demand.""
II
Let us turn from this century-old story to consider the rôle of the
economist of the American economist-in our own Great War, and in
its aftermath. The first fact to arrest attention is the deeper conscious-
ness, the more articulate form, the larger recruitment of the science.
In 1917 political economy in the United States could fairly rank with
any of its sister sciences in the definiteness of its aim, in the detail of
its exposition, in the range of its influence, in the ardor of its devotees.
In outright numbers and in relative competence the fraternity had
made notable advance. Compactly organized in scientific association,
supplied as to assembled material and equipped as to technical jour-
nals, animated with high sense of public responsibility, established in
academic office with large student groups affording apprentices and
offering discipleship—the economist had come to fill a distinctive place
in the nation's life. Increasing requisition by public service and sensa-
tional bidding-up by private enterprise had so far dissipated the old.
seclusion that prospective scientific impoverishment rather than pres-
ent public neglect constituted his concern. With the greater special-
ization of social effort nation, state, and city were utilizing the econo-
mist's counsel and enlisting his personnel. In Washington this was
physically manifest. The Cosmos Club, like Piccadilly Circus, was
the point at which one might stand and see his world pass.
The permanent Census Office, the reconstituted Department of
Labor, the rehabilitated Tariff Commission, the enlarged Department
of Commerce, the reorganized Federal Trade Commssion, the expand-
ing Department of Agriculture were so many stages in the economist's
progress. Not always as expertly staffed as might be, hampered often
by political exigency, they reflected a widening infiltration. There
were positive triumphs too. Workmen's compensation had become a
***Autobiography (ed. Chapman, 1877), vol. III, p. 87; cited in Webb, Industrial
Democracy (1897), vol. II, p. 608, n.
653.
Trade Unionism (1869), p. 55%; cited in Webb, Industrial Democracy, vol. II, p.**