the purpose is to direct attention, let us say, to all that contributes to
social welfare and is equally useful in many other ways. But, as he
very correctly points out, it will not be at all serviceable as the basis
of an income tax. The one tacitly assumed by the National Bureau
of Economic Research, despite the fact that it differs radically from
that of Professor Fisher, is nevertheless admirably designed for the
stated purpose, which is to "put a value on National Income," a purpose
impossible of achievement under Professor Fisher's definition. It is
by reason of considerations like these that the present discussion is
confined to private incomes.
If economists, and possibly jurists and accountants too, have not
found it easy to frame a definition of income on which all can readily
agree, is it possible that such a definition is to be found in the income-
tax laws? This is hardly to be expected. For each such tax is either
an outgrowth of some older tax or it has had to be fitted into some
existing system of taxes and thus has been adjusted to its environment.
Differences in the framework of government and differences in the in-
dustrial and social organization of different countries would, one
might surmise, give rise to differences in the things included in tax-
able incomes. Professor Felix Flügel recently made an examination
of all or nearly all of the income-tax laws of the world for the express
purpose of ascertaining how they defined income. He found that: "In
most of the income-tax laws in force at the present time, a definition
of income is not to be found. The net taxable income is determined
by an enumeration of taxable and non-taxable receipts."³
It has frequently been found that an excellent method of arriving
at the meaning of a term in common use is to examine the things that
are commonly included with a view of ascertaining what their common
characteristics are.
Listed by common consent under income are many and somewhat
heterogeneous things. In the first rank are: wages, salaries, and
other forms of compensation for, or the results of, personal services or
activities. These are income whether received in the form of money or
in kind. I feel safe in saying that there is rarely if ever any doubt
about their income character. In fact, they are usually regarded as
pure income unmixed with any extraneous elements. They are usually
thought of as income in whole and not in part only. They are usually
contractual receipts. But that does not seem to be what makes them
income. For not only are personal earnings obtained outside of any
fixed contractual relation considered as income, but there are, as we
shall see in a moment, other forms of income not contractual in
character. Wages and the like are also usually the result of toil.
**Quoted from an unpublished manuscript.**