tend to check the rise in per capita consumption, and this in turn, via the
so-called Relation, would affect the volume of capital formation. According
to the optimum population theory, however, it may not infrequently be the
case, and indeed probably was during the greater part of the nineteenth
century, that population growth itself facilitated mass production methods
and accelerated the progress of technique. If this be correct, population
growth was itself responsible for a part of the rise in per capita real income,
and this, via the influence of a rising consumption upon investment, stimulated
capital formation. Thus it is quite possible that population growth may
have acted both directly and indirectly to stimulate the volume of capital
formation.

It is not possible, I think, to make even an approximate estimate of the
proportion of the new capital created in the nineteenth century which was a
direct consequence of the opening up of new territory. The development of
new countries was indeed so closely intertwined with the growth of population
that it would be difficult to avoid double counting. What proportion
of new capital formation in the United States went each year into the western
frontier we do not know, but it must have been very considerable. Apparently
about one-fourth of the total capital accumulations of England were invested
abroad by 1914, and one-seventh of those of France.
These figures, while only suggestive, point unmistakably to the conclusion
that the opening of new territory and the growth of population
were together responsible for a very large fraction-possibly somewhere
near one-half of the total volume of new capital formation in the nineteenth
century. These outlets for new investment are rapidly being closed.
The report on Limits of Land Settlement by President Isaiah Bowman and
others may be regarded as conclusive in its findings that there are no important
areas left for exploitation and settlement. So far as population is concerned,
that of western Europe has already virtually reached a standstill;
but that in eastern Europe, notably in Russia, is still growing, and so also
is that in the Orient. And much of this area will probably experience a
considerable industrialization. But it is not yet clear how far the mature
industrial countries will participate in this development through capital
export. Russia still has a long way to go before she becomes completely
industrialized; but foreign capital is not likely to play any significant rôle in
this process. India will offer some opportunity for British investment, but
the total is likely to be small relative to the volume of British foreign investments
in the nineteenth century. China and the Orient generally offer, in
view of the present and prospective turmoil in that area, relatively meager
investment opportunities. At all events, no one is likely to challenge the
statement that foreign investment will in the next fifty years play an incomparably
smaller rôle than was the case in the nineteenth century.
Thus the outlets for new investment are rapidly narrowing down to those