1922]
The Economist's Spiral
15
The Federal Reserve Board, shorn of its essential power to control
expansion at a critical stage, thus became an impotent witness to an
orgy of credit and currency inflation, which the belated resort to
higher discount rates-literally compelled by the imminence of a
threatened gold standard—was able to correct only through the wastes
and losses of an imperative deflation.
Free supply of bank credit in connection with our borrowing in the
period of belligerency may perhaps be explained-though not justified
―by the exigencies of war. But not even this plea is admissible to the
resumption of such policies after the Armistice and the continued
maintenance of artifically low discount rates. Designed originally to
facilitate e anticipation of war loans and taxes, the preferential dis-
count rate operated during the war as an instrumentality for “financ-
ing by bank credit." After the war, it degenerated into a device for
salvaging the "borrow cheap” entanglement and for masking the exis-
tence and staving off the maturity of a huge floating debt.
The procedure of credit issues to balance current budgets, so violent-
ly reprobated in the case of European states, continued in essence our
practice during the post-Armstice months. Instead of using both fiat
currency and fiat credit we restricted ourselves to the more insidious
form. The demoralizing effect of the two methods upon the social
structure has differed only in degree.
38
III
In the security of retrospect it is tempting to indulge in counsel of
perfection. The din has quieted, the fever subsided and practices for
which precedent was lacking and occasion was imperative are likely
to be estimated in the wisdom of hindsight. John Bright declared of
his opponents: "They always have been wrong; they always will be
wrong and when they cease to be wrong they will cease to be the Tory
party." It is right to guard against this to forego outright
stricture and to temper absolute valuation by relative allowance. But
withal there must be just weight and measure. It would be reckless to
assert that the intricate problems of our war economy would have been
fully served or properly solved by the scientist in responsible control.
The economist will not wish to be charged with Canning's criticism of
Lord Sidmouth: "Carrying into politics the indefinable air of a
physician inspecting the tongue of the state." There is always the
rare statesman like Peel who “in three cases out of four knew a thing
just in time, after it was known to the philosophers, before it was
30 Alington, Twenty Years (1921), p. 22.
39
40 Ibid., p. 32.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:36:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
