trade union can hope to offer him that they easily attract and hold
the great majority of the employees.
The limitation of the old-line trade union is that it is designed to
strengthen the power of its members to fight the exploiting type of
employer. When confronted by an employer who is really actuated
by good will toward his employees and is capable of organizing his
business so as to offer them better conditions than most of his com-
petitors, the trade union becomes in great measure superfluous. On
the other hand with such an employer a company union can be devel-
oped into a powerful agency for raising the level of intelligence and
understanding of the employees, for according them a larger and
larger share in determining the conditions under which they shall
work and in preparing the way for that better industrial world which
we like to believe is in process of becoming.
The choice between the company union and the trade union as
regards this vital question as to which will develop the better worker
and citizen thus depends on the type of employer who as time goes on
is to manage our public service industries. So long as the profit-
seeking exploiter type predominates, our preference must be unquali-
fiedly for the fighting trade union. As the coöperative employer who
honestly regards himself as the senior partner in industry and his
employees as his junior partners becomes predominant there will be
less need for the fighting trade union and a larger field of usefulness
for the company union, as a step toward true copartnership in in-
dustry.
8
Our conclusions can be restated in a few words. There has been
a notable increase in the number of company unions in the last few
years and at the same time a marked decline in the membership of
trade unions. Company unions are better calculated than trade
unions to promote continuity, economy and efficiency of operation and
are more amenable to changes initiated by employers. Therefore
employers favor them and their associations, like the National In-
dustrial Conference Board, issue highly commendatory reports in re-
gard to their operation. They are not at all well fitted to contend
against the grasping type of employer for more favorable wages, hours
or working conditions and, therefore, trade unionists condemn them
as a delusion and a snare. In the case of public service industries the
public's vital interest in continuous operation is causing authoritative
adjustment boards to be created, standards as to wages, hours and
working conditions to be laid down by law and restrictions to be
imposed upon the right to strike. Moreover the public's automatic
'It is not intended to imply that it is because company unions have multiplied
that trade unions have declined, although in a few instances such direct causal
connection might be established.