1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
no more than our political system. The political structure of the
western world has undergone radical changes during the last hun-
dred years and it is clear that democracy carries with it the pos-
sibility of radical changes in industrial structure, brought about
through legal procedure. We are equally blind if we fail to see
that the hundred years which have placed political power in the
hands of the masses of the population have also changed in their
favor the balance of industrial power. These changes clearly fore-
shadow changes in the structure of our industrial system. The
question is as to the lines which such changes must follow if they
are to be constructive rather than destructive and accomplish their
purpose of improving the economic condition of the masses of the
people.
Time is lacking, even had I the ability, to outline in detail the
course which we should follow in our industrial readjustments.
My purpose is simply to call attention to certain facts which
must be recognized if we are to realize the true nature of our
problem and thus avoid the mistakes and disappointment which
will follow attempts to solve it by methods foredoomed to failure.
There has been a general inclination, evident even in the case
of some economists and sociologists, to assume that the problem of
the production of wealth has been solved by the introduction of
power machinery and that the only problem which remains is the
problem of distribution. This is due I believe to an exaggerated
estimate of the increase of productive power based on a superfi-
cial examination of the facts and to a failure to recognize that
the enormous increase in aggregate productive power, which has
undoubtedly taken place, has to a considerable extent been ab-
sorbed in the support of a population increasing far more rapidly
than at any other period of the world's history, far more rapidly
in fact than under any conceivable condition it can continue to
increase.
The tendency to overestimate the increase in per capita produc-
tive power during the last hundred and fifty years results from con-
centrating our attention on the more obvious and overlooking the
less obvious facts in the changes which have taken place.
We compare the quantity of cloth turned out in a modern cot-
ton mill with the quantity which could be turned out by the same
number of laborers using the spinning wheel and the hand loom,
forgetting the labor which has gone into the construction of the
mill and its equipment and the fact that a large part of the labor
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
