union can improve greatly both the safety and the efficiency of the
service. If the employer couples with intelligent encouragement of
the company union considerate plans for enabling the employees to
acquire stock in the corporation, for profit-sharing, and for insurance
against illness, unemployment and dependent old age, he can readily
make any promised benefits of the national trade union seem hollow
and unreal and develop an esprit de corps among his employees that
will react not only to his advantage but to their advantage and to the
advantage of the public-providing always that just and reasonable
standards as to wages and hours are maintained by public authority.
The case is not so clear in connection with the operating depart-
ments of the railroads. Here the employees are scattered over a
wider territory, standards as to wages, hours, etc., must approximate
uniformity on different roads at least in the same district and there
are other circumstances favoring national organizations. As we per-
sist, however, in the policy on which we have embarked of prescribing
by law standards for railroad employees, of maintaining a government
board to enforce these standards, and of limiting the right to strike,
steam railway employees, like street railway employees in Kansas,
must feel less strongly the urge to maintain their national organiza-
tions and must become more alive to the advantages of more coöpera-
tive relations with the employing companies.
All of the advantages of both forms of organization might be secured,
if railroad executives would continue to settle questions of wages,
etc., by negotiation with the brotherhoods and on their side the
brotherhoods would coöperate in the organization of their members
into company units for promoting safety, efficiency, and economy on
their respective roads and for adjusting local differences locally."
Both might then use their influence not to destroy the Railroad Labor
Board but to bring about its reorganization so that it will more in-
telligently fulfil its dual function of insuring the continuous operation
of the railroads and adjusting fairly and reasonably issues which the
executives and organized workers cannot settle through negotiation.
I have reserved for final consideration the aspect that is after all of
chief concern to economists-which form of organization, company
unions or trade unions, is likely to lead in the long run to the develop-
ment of the "more intelligent, more capable and more public-spirited
workers and citizens"? To answer this question it is necessary to
have in mind some ideal as to the goal toward which our industrial
development is leading. The ideal which commends itself to my own
'As regards competitive industries, where the conditions make the maintenance
of trade or industrial unions of national scope desirable, some such combination of
the unions with shop committees or "works councils" has many advantages for all
concerned.