The main papers and the round tables in this year's program, like those
of a year ago, concern a single, though broadly inclusive, subject. A year ago
we considered the various factors which influence fluctuations in the rate of
investment, income and employment. In selecting the topic for this year
we have turned away in large measure from the ever-present and all-ab-
sorbing problem of cyclical fluctuations and have set ourselves the task of
probing the problems of structural change in our economy, involving among
other things also how these structural changes in various countries have
affected the cycle itself. In the main sessions and in the round-table dis-
cussions various aspects of "The Changing American Economy” are con-
sidered—changes in the structure and functioning of our economic institu-
tions. The topic is, however, so vast that even in a meeting as large as ours
it is quite impossible to include all aspects pertinent to the subject; and
doubtless many members will feel that important segments of the problem
have been overlooked by our program committee.
One may ask: "Is there any special reason why in the year 1938 we
should devote our attention as economists to the general subject "The
Changing Character of the American Economy"? Throughout the modern
era, ceaseless change has been the law of economic life. Every period is in
some sense a period of transition. The swift stream of events in the last
quarter century offers, however, overwhelming testimony in support of the
thesis that the economic order of the western world is undergoing in this
generation a structural change no less basic and profound in character than
that transformation of economic life and institutions which we are wont to
designate loosely by the phrase "the Industrial Revolution." We are pass-
ing, so to speak, over a divide which separates the great era of growth and
expansion of the nineteenth century from an era which no man, unwilling
to embark on pure conjecture, can as yet characterize with clarity or precision.
We are moving swiftly out of the order in which those of our generation
were brought up, into no one knows what.