6
O. M. W. Sprague
[March
point the specter of the Sherman Anti-Trust law rises in the minds of
many as an insuperable obstacle. I question very much, however, whether
the anti-trust law should be regarded as a serious impediment to this con-
certed action in view of the present attitude of the Washington authorities.
After all, concerted action designed to reduce prices and increase demand
is a very different thing from concerted action directed toward maintaining,
to say nothing of establishing, an increase in prices.
Following the adoption of a concerted policy directed toward bringing
about an increase in volume, the industries concerned would be in a far
better position than now to insist upon an increase in efficiency and perhaps
also a reduction in some existing wage scales; but certainly nothing in
this direction can reasonably be expected so long as the policy of the
various industries is precisely that of the less intelligent labor leaders—
that of making adjustments to demand almost exclusively through reduced
output.
I now turn to the question whether there is reasonable ground for
anticipating a large and maintained increase in the demand for the products
of the capital-goods industries in the event that prices were quite materially
reduced. In the case of the familiar uses for additional capital, all of our
past experience indicates that here a little, and there a little, are oppor-
tunities for employing additional capital in improved and enlarged equip-
ment provided costs are low-both the cost of securing capital and the
cost of the concrete things in the purchase of which the funds are expended.
To increase and improve facilities for the production of greater quantities
of the consumer goods and services which we have been producing in the
past, however, may readily lead to over-development. Moreover, it is not
to be anticipated that there will be any large absorption of capital in some
of the directions where the most considerable investments were made in
the twenties. It is not probable, for example, that lower prices would in-
duce in the near future any very considerable increase in the construction
of office buildings or high rental apartment houses. In these directions
development was carried unduly far in the twenties and presumably we
have not yet grown up to the existing supply. Even under existing conditions.
of costs of materials and labor, there is clearly a sufficiently elastic demand
for electric power to induce a very considerable absorption of capital once
the utility policy of the Government has been determined on a basis reason-
ably fair both to the public and to the companies. With lower costs of
construction materials, no doubt still further expansion in this field could
be expected. In the case of the railroads, a large but less considerable
absorption of capital may be anticipated even though the stimulus of an
elastic demand is lacking. Wise railroad investment would seem to be
limited to such expenditure as will definitely reduce costs of operation.
In view of the abundance of savings seeking investment, we cannot,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:51:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
