systematically and without protest, of identical bids and of list prices higher
than even the monopolists can obtain in what remains of the
open market;
approval, and even enforcement, for regulated industries such as rail-
roads, of rate policies which make rates behave even more perversely, as
far as cyclical flexibility is concerned, than the prices of unregulated mon-
opolies; encouragement to and protection of labor monopolies; deliberate
schooling of agriculture in the pleasures and profits of monopolistic be-
havior.
The record of government encouragement to monopoly, when looked at
in conjunction with government's spasmodic efforts to enforce competition
and its intermittent clamor against monopoly, reminds me, and justifiably
so, of an old cartoon I once saw, depicting a political demonstration in
the streets of London, in which the determined-looking marchers carried
two banners, one of which bore the slogan, “NO MONOPOLY!" and the
other the slogan, “NO COMPETITION!”
All that I suggest, therefore, with respect to the dogma that free com-
petition can substantially survive if government gives it due protection
and encouragement, is not that its validity under modern conditions is
obvious, but that we have not the right definitely to reject it before it has
been given an honest and thorough test.
As a final illustration of the possible survival of usefulness of old dogmas
which were the product of the long view, I cite the proposition that the
timidity of capital makes the maintenance of "business confidence” neces-
sary if investment is to be maintained at the level required for sustained
prosperity. According to this dogma, the capitalist will hoard his own
money, or will send it abroad-be there any safe place to send it—and
will refrain from borrowing other people's money for investment purposes,
if even a faint shadow is cast on the political security of his investment.
The spokesmen for capital have found this dogma very much to their
liking, and have been claiming for some six years that a political shadow
has been cast over the security of their investments, and that this has been
responsible for the low rate of new investment, and consequently for the
persistence of depression. To reinforce their claims, they have done their
trembling in public, with vocal accompaniments.
There is no specific invocation of old dogmas, I understand, which the
economists of the new enlightenment regard as more absurd, more insub-
stantial and unsubstantiated, than the claim that the timidity of investment
capital under the impact of political fears has been a significant factor in
causing the low rate of new investment of the past six years or so. The
capitalist, they agree, is a timid beast, but they assert that it is only the risk
of loss he is really timid about. He invests, they say, when he sees a clear
chance of profit, and hoards when he doesn't, regardless of whether the