1921]
The Post-War Outlook
ry
racy is to hazard both. I plead for radicalism to conservative ends,
for a progressive conservatism.
I hold it, therefore, to be our enduringly serious blunder in the con-
duct of the great war that we failed to realize the long meanings of the
financial policies that we followed. We have now promptly to take ac-
count of our newly emerging dangers. In point of degree the war has
vastly added to the perplexities of our institutional life by further solidi-
fying the economic stratification of society. The world has now to
reckon with 250 billions of war debts. The peace with Germany was
made to turn upon adding to its domestic war debt further billions of
debt to be externally held and collected. Consider the domestic debt
alone. These forty billions of war bonds are a promise that for an in-
definite future from the taxpayers of Germany the bondholders shall en-
joy a two billion dollar revenue. We did not substitute our own claims
for these but added ours to these-and all of this is our solicitude for the
domestic peace and the institutional democracy of Germany. Not only
do we leave it to the German taxpayers instead of to the malefactor
classes to provide our scant indemnity-and to our own taxpayers to
meet the deficit-but we allow to the malefactor classes two billion dol-
lars of annual revenues at the cost of their victim classes-enhanced
class wealth and enhanced mass poverty-not that we have so little
care but so little understanding of democracy and its needs. Even if
the rulers of Germany shall cease to plot wars, the peace which we leave
to the German people they cannot abide. For them it is an intolerable
poverty that has its cause and correlate in class wealth. Germany will
hardly win through to democracy excepting on terms of some sort of
repudiation; peaceable conceivably, disorderly probably, revolutionary
possibly. We have made no gift of democracy. Democracy is, I still
believe, to arrive in Europe, but only as the need and aspiration gain
the necessary strength to override the new barriers that the war has
erected and that the peace has reinforced.
I urge, in sum, that the present problem of the institutional conserva-
tive is the establishment and the maintenance of economic democracy.
Failing of this, we shall at the best provide solely the forms but never
the realities that are at the heart of democratic institutions. We shall
decline to the dangerous and temporary equilibrium of the servile state
-the aristocratic competitive order—to end either in a return finally
to the ways of equalitarian competition, or in social disintegration, or
in a drifting out upon the unplumbed, uncharted, and perhaps shore-
less seas of democratic socialism. Or there is, it may be, one other way:
Guild Socialism may get a hearing, a captivating and not incredible
compromise between the collective and the competitive principles,
equally unfittingly to be named either socialism or anarchism.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:35:53 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
