8
Matthew B. Hammond
[March
War is a costly and uncertain means of retaining control of economic
resources in distant lands. A more effective means is that of interna-
tional capitalistic combination. There are few countries which actually
exclude foreign capital from participation in domestic enterprises al-
though some countries forbid alien ownership of land or impose special
restriction upon the exploitation of their natural resources. The laws
which seek to control international monopolies seldom make any dis-
tinction between national and international combinations of capital.
Hence it has become increasingly popular, especially since the World
War, for international combinations to be formed to secure concessions
for the development of industrial resources when large capital invest-
ments are required. If, as usually happens, the capital investments in
such combinations come from several or many countries, such nations
have thereby given hostages for the preservation of peace.
There is neither time nor need in this paper to give a description of
these international combinations or even to recite their names. Most of
us know in at least a general way of the European iron and steel cartels,
of the combinations which have been formed in the potash, fixed nitrogen,
dye and artificial silk industries, of the Swedish-American match trust,
of the agreements or attempted agreements in the oil, sugar, rubber and
copper industries. Some of these agreements or combinations have been
formed to prevent over-production or to stabilize prices, it is true; but
the point here emphasized is that every one of these combinations, agree-
ments or pooling arrangements marks a shifting of conflict from the
political to the economic sphere and, to the extent to which this takes
place, lessens the likelihood of war between the nations.
Generally speaking, it may be said that capital knows neither national
nor race distinctions. Given equal security, it works as willingly for
Jew as for Gentile, for Catholic as for Protestant, for the yellow race
as for the Caucasian. Political governments having assumed certain
attitudes or made certain pronouncements find it very difficult to yield
the positions thus taken. The national pride is at stake and statesmen
and diplomats are hard put to it to find new formulas which seem to
adhere to the old attitudes while in reality they adopt new ones. But
economic statesmen have no such embarrassments. Economic life is by
its very nature subject to change. New forces make their appearance
which call for new methods of solving commercial and industrial prob-
lems. Policies which for a time have succeeded but which have lost vigor
are sacrificed as quickly and as ruthlessly as are old machines or old
stocks of goods. For this reason it will usually be found to be the part
of wisdom for governments to interfere as little as possible with the
international flow of capital and with the financial and industrial ar-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:45:18 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
