Fred M. Taylor
[March
A third comment needed here is that every one of these numerous pri-
mary factors has its own particular degree or amount of effective im-
portance in the vast complex of productive processes in which it par-
ticipates. That effective importance of each primary factor is derived
from and determined by the importances of the innumerable commodities
which emerge from that complex of productive processes. Because the
effective importances of the commodities are expressed in terms of
money value, the importances of the several factors will be so expressed.
At present it will be assumed-to prove this assumption will be the task
of the second part of this paper-that the authorities of our socialist
state will have proved able to ascertain with a sufficient degree of ac-
curacy these effective importances or values of all the different kinds
of primary factors, and that they will have embodied the results in
arithmetic tables which I shall usually designate factor-valuation tables.
In order to determine the cost of producing any particular commodity,
let us say a sewing machine, it would be necessary to multiply the valu-
ation of each factor used in producing that machine by the quantity
of that factor so used and add together these different products. If
the resultant total turned out to be thirty dollars, we should have to say
that the producing of the sewing machine made a drain on the com-
munity's economic resources of thirty dollars; or, in other words, that
its resources-cost was thirty dollars.
I must not leave this matter of cost in a socialist state without re-
marking that the kind of cost just explained, resources-cost, is in fact
very closely allied to what, under our system, is often called expense-
cost. Indeed, a very good case can be made for the contention that,
in the present order, these two kinds of cost are essentially the same
thing, though capable of being looked at, and labeled, from two quite
different points of view. To the voluntary producer of our present
order, who must buy the factors which he uses to produce a sewing
machine, the thirty-dollar cost of producing that sewing machine is an
expense-cost. On the other hand, to the economist who believes that
the automatic working of competition gives to each primary factor a
price which expresses with sufficient accuracy the effective importance of
that factor in the productive process as a whole, to him, that same
thirty-dollar cost presents itself as a resources-cost, a drain on society's
economic resources of thirty dollars.
So much as to the general character and the specific details of the
plan for determining what commodities shall be produced which I hold
to be the only right plan for a socialist state to adopt. I must now
take a few moments to argue for the soundness of the plan. In the
first place, the plan in its general outline is surely the one which should
be maintained in a socialist state. That is, (1) the state should deter-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:55:06 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
