duced sufficient fear among the producers to lead to a clamorous demand
that their own government reverse its policy.
The history of mankind has shown that ethnological, political and
even ecclesiastical societies are likely, when unchecked, to be more tyran-
nical in their treatment of their defeated adversaries than are groups
formed to carry on the economic struggle. It is seldom that individuals
or associations pursuing economic ends push an advantage which they
have gained over their competitors to the point of complete destruction.
High prices may for a time yield high profits, but they will ultimately
destroy purchasing power or call forth substitutes. Low wages may be
reluctantly accepted but they do not secure the full productive capacities
of the workers. Competition among producers does not often take that
cut-throat form which results in the extinction of some of them but is
more likely to end in an agreement between, if not a complete merger of,
the competitors. The prudent creditor is one who hesitates to force
his debtor into bankruptcy.
It is perhaps some dim recognition of the fact that the economic con-
flict is seldom destructive in its consequences that has led nations, when
political or racial antagonisms have produced an impasse, to call in the
international banker or the business man of large affairs to point a way
out of the difficulties. Such men have learned, sometimes by experience,
more often by observation, that in competition it is well not to push an
advantage too far. They have also perceived that international strife,
while it may bring large and quick returns to the war profiteer, seldom
brings lasting advantages to the well-established business, especially if
that business is in part dependent on the international market as an
outlet for its goods.
War, while primarily a military and political conflict, cannot be kept
out of the economic arena. Trading with the enemy becomes a disloyal
act; the property and the patent rights of enemy aliens are sequestered;
blockades interfere with the trade of even neutral nations; moratoria
are declared which relieve the debtors from the importunities of their
creditors, and trade is diverted from its usual channels. Worst of all,
the war is likely to leave in its wake impoverished peoples who for years.
and even decades will be weak and uncertain purchasers of domestic as
well as foreign goods. If Adam Smith was right in his belief that mer-
chants and manufacturers have a better knowledge of their own interests
than have other classes, we may safely conclude that big business in-
terests, other than the manufacturers of munitions, will be more likely to
throw their influence in behalf of international peace than will those
persons who have less at stake and who, for that reason, are more likely
to give their passions and prejudices free rein. The pecuniary instinct
is not one of the noblest of human attributes but it is more subject to