general, to get food enough to keep soul and body together, and cloth-
ing and shelter enough to meet the most urgent demands of decency.
Apparently even in the wealthiest country in the world the an-
nual product is not sufficient to provide more than a very moderate
surplus above what is required for the physical necessities of its
people as a whole.
According to King's estimate there were in 1910 over nine mil-
lion families, excluding single individuals without dependents, with
incomes of less than $900, about one half of the total of such
families in the country. As already stated, the families with in-
comes in excess of $3,000 constituted not more than 4 per cent of
the total. From these families must have come the major part of
the savings of the nation. If we had taken the whole surplus above
$3,000 from these families, less their savings, and distributed it
among the poorest classes of the population, it might conceivably,
for the moment, have established a minimum family income of
$1,000; but it is hardly necessary to argue that no such radical
redistribution of income could be accomplished, either through
taxation or an increase of wages at the expense of the other fac-
tors of production without a falling off in production which would
far exceed the sum distributed.
The production of a large portion of the income in excess of
$3,000 per family was undoubtedly due to the efficiency and sav-
ings of those into whose hands it passed, was an essential factor
in stimulating their efficiency and savings, and could by no pro-
cess of reasoning be attributed to those among whom we have as-
sumed it to be distributed.
I am, of course, aware that these figures do not apply today.
Not only have money values doubled, but war has affected the
distribution of the national income probably to the advantage of
the well-to-do. Present conditions are, however, abnormal. The
war gave a tremendous stimulus to productive energy. We called
on hitherto unused labor power and we worked overtime. There
is bound to be a reaction from these conditions. It is still too
early to estimate what the permanent effect of the war will be,
but there can hardly be said to be as yet clear evidences of per-
manent increase in per capita production.
I do not wish to minimize the importance of the problem of dis-
tribution or the evil of extravagant expenditure. The smaller the
aggregate income, the more important its equitable distribution
and the more reprehensible extravagant and wasteful expenditure.