resulted in unjustified differentials. Moreover, in many cases high wages
for some groups have been sacrificed in order to increase the wages of the
lowly paid groups. In any event, the fact of unjustified differentials does
not necessarily argue against collective bargaining. It argues rather for the
industrial union so that craft wages will not be out of line with wages of
the unskilled, and for government action to provide needed data and
efficient conciliation and arbitration machinery.

I pass to the incidence of wage increases exacted. As to the effects of
increased wages, economists, as well as business men, when confronted by
demands for higher union wages, all too frequently assume that both labor
costs and total costs are increased by the amount the rate of pay is increased.
The fact is that other things do not necessarily remain equal; we are entirely
too much inclined to assume that they do. In a dynamic situation, there is
no necessary and inevitable relationship between a change in wage rates,
especially on a time basis, and labor cost, and there is no necessary and inevitable
relationship between a changed labor cost and total cost. For what
would be an increased cost due to higher wages may, like some taxes, be
transformed or offset in some way or other.

A wage increase may lead the employer to select and train his workers
more carefully. More important, when the union comes in, the turnover
of labor is generally reduced to a fraction of what it has been; the cost of
acquiring new workers and training them, and the losses from interrupted
operation due to unbalanced sections are reduced. Generally the cost of
supervision is also reduced in the union shop. Again, the union may coöperate
in introducing or extending piece work where all previous attempts
have failed. In a Chicago instance, in spite of the dilution of labor made
during a labor shortage in 1919, a clothing firm found that after piece
work had been introduced with the active coöperation of the union, the
output of suits and overcoats per worker in a given unit of time increased
60 per cent. This instance is not unique in my experience. Finally, in cases
of union-management coöperation-which is by no means limited to well
known railway shops-exceptional gains in efficiency and economies may
result. Not infrequently the higher wages are earned, if labor cost is the
test.

On the other hand, it must be admitted that the union shop may be
accompanied by enhanced labor costs exceeding any increase in wage rates
secured. Possibly management loses adequate control over hiring, lay-off
and discharge; for hiring may be controlled by the union and discharge may
be for "cause" only, thus making it difficult to weed out the less desirable.
More frequently than they coöperate in the extension of piece work, unions
oppose it; seldom are bonus systems tolerated in the organized trades. The
union may have bad morale, due to defeat in some objectives, or to a militant