seventies and the turn of the century. Wages were pegged; payment for
timbering and "dead work” was reduced or eliminated altogether; coerced
purchases at company stores charging high prices, and powder sold at a
profit of 200 per cent, took the larger part of the earnings of the miners.
Even in a city like Chicago, an industry may dominate a large community
and the firms engaged in it may control the situation within rather wide
limits. Going beyond this, I could cite a number of instances where asso-
ciations of manufacturers or merchants have fixed scales or, indeed, max-
imum wages to be paid and have enforced them more successfully than any
American state has enforced its minimum wage standards. How many such
instances there are no one can know, but there is good reason to believe that
they are not so highly exceptional as the uninitiated think. They have sig-
nificance in the real world of employment. Yet, it is true that, though im-
perfect, a competition for labor exists. And, of course, the productivity
theory of wages also remains essentially true, however little it may really
tell the curious who wish to have wages explained. The point is that the
element of friction, as the theorist calls it, is of real significance in connec-
tion with wages, where the operation of market forces is more likely to
conserve the workers' welfare than their interests in hours and working
conditions.
What I have said relates chiefly to the need for collective bargaining to
defend the workers' interest. Most unions, however, are often not defend-
ing the wages they have had, but are on the offensive to get more; not infre-
quently, emphatically more. "Heavens, what is your limit?" cried the head
of a great industry, in a collective bargaining conference. "No limit," re-
plied the union chief, "the same as yours." Unions are usually trying to get
better differentials for their own members. Their success in getting such
differentials is one of the larger facts in collective bargaining.
Hence the criticisms—too severe in my opinion—by most business men
and also most economists, of unionism, the differentials the union secures,
and the resulting utilization of productive capacity.
There is little criticism of the standardization of wages as such; but
there is much criticism of unjustified differentials and of enhancement of
wages on the ground that these will increase labor costs and total costs,
with undesirable results, such as unemployment and repressed enterprise.
Without question some unions secure unjustified differentials. I will not
mention plumbers, for you have heard of them. Unionism may result in an
uneconomic distribution and use of a nation's productive capacity. But with-
out control through collective bargaining or through law, sweated wages
and sweated industries are not highly exceptional. They are uneconomic.
Think of coal in the nineties, of the needle trades, of the laundries and of
the candy factories. It is likely that collective bargaining has more fre-
quently brought wages in an industry up to an acceptable level than it has