1920]
The Nature of Our Economic Problem
17
Nor does the success so far achieved in the field of business ad-
ministration by officers directly or indirectly dependent upon
popular vote create confidence that such a change in the control
of industry would contribute to efficiency or progress.
If one
party or the other must exercise exclusive control, the weight of
argument is in favor of the class which has a property interest at
stake.
In the past, progress in the field of politics and industry has
usually come through conflict of opposing interests. Are we yet
ready to substitute conference and cooperation in seeking the so-
lution which promises most for the common interests of all? It
seemed for a moment at the close of the war that we were, but re-
cent events can hardly be described as encouraging.
In an industrial society based on division of occupations, it is
impossible to secure harmony of immediate interests between eco-
nomic classes, whether seller and buyer, borrower and lender, or
employer and employee, just as it is impossible to secure harmony
of immediate interests between nations. Such harmony simply
does not exist. It is not impossible to secure a working basis for
coöperative action recognized by all concerned as based on reas-
onable principles and promising to each better results in the long
run than could be obtained through conflict. All that is necessary
is a knowledge of the facts involved and the dominance of the
spirit of reason and far-sightedness.
There are many problems of great importance connected with
the coördination and smooth-working of cur extremely complex
economic system and with the distribution of its burdens and re-
wards, but the fundamental problem is still what it always has
been, the problem of increased per capita production and of the
rational and economical use of wealth, not a temporary increase
brought about under conditions which in the long run diminish
productive power and involve the sacrifice of things more impor-
tant than wealth, but a permanent increase, resting on individual
efficiency, effective coöperation, and the adjustment of the num-
ber of the population to the supply of natural resources upon
which it must in the last analysis subsist.
Brown University.
HENRY B. GARDNER.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
