1924]
Income as Recurrent, Consumable Receipts
ry
Still more difficult and confusing are the interrelations of different
incomes in the complex organization of our modern society. Out of
the cup of coffee which you had for breakfast fall a multitude of drops,
each tiny in itself, contributing from your earnings to the income of
literally thousands of others. One other illustration is all that I have
time for in this connection. There was once a hard working carpenter
who had always earned good wages, but who grew old, fell sick and
eventually passed to a well-earned rest. His income stopped when he
fell sick. But at once there descended upon him a horde of doctors,
dentists, X-ray photographers, nurses, druggists, hospital keepers,
ambulance drivers, and perhaps lawyers, money lenders, and pawn
brokers and finally the priest and undertaker. Now all of these, cer-
tainly collectively, and possibly some singly, made more income in a
short time out of the poor carpenter's misfortunes than he had earned
in many a year. Moreover the rent went on, the water company, the
gas and electric company, the coal dealer, the butcher, the grocer, the
plumber and many others continued their profitable ministrations until
he got safely away into another world.
Out of the numerable interrelationships which these illustrations
suggest and which arise in large part from the complexities of modern
economic organization, come many difficulties in any study of in-
come. Out of these difficulties a way has frequently been sought by
attempting to define income as the social dividend or the net products
of industry or in some similar impersonal way. It is easy
to say
that
income should be thought of as consisting of the useful things pro-
duced, or even of the enjoyment to be had from using them. While
this gets away from the confusion due to money, from double counting
and from other difficulties arising from the interrelations of private
incomes, it creates in turn a number of new difficulties. For the term
income is most commonly used to designate my income, your income
and his or her income; in short, private incomes. We can, of course,
say with propriety that the public revenues from taxation and other
sources are society's income when society is thus personified. But we
are changing the ordinary connotation of the term when we speak of
any kind of summation of your income, my income and his or her in-
come as national or social income, for it still remains mine and yours
and his or hers and not society's at all. Income is a purely relative
term. The things which constitute your or my income are not income
at all, when considered as severed from the relationship to you or to me
which the term income implies. When for technical purposes we thus
take the word out of its traditional field we may of course give it such
a technical meaning as will best serve our purpose.
But it is, in any
case, a technical or artificial meaning and good to the extent that it
serves a purpose.
Thus Professor Fisher's definition is admirable if
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:39:47 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
