6
Herbert J. Davenport
[March
consumption, of standards of living imposed by the haves that can and
pursued by the have-nots that can't; of the rainbow fading-out of
affirmative enjoyment into drab necessity; of the racial menace of de-
clining birth-rates; of the dreary futility and the spreading harm of
the decorative life for women-questions for the discussion of which
there is here no time.
All the more urgently, then, not as matter of inscrutable faith but
only of sheer factual outlook, I stress my assumption that democracy is
coming. And, if so, I insist, economic institutions that shall make
room for it there must imperatively be, on penalty ultimately of a
fundamental reconstruction of society or of the debacle of civilization.
New social forces are preparing. With the man whose ideals of worth
incline to political or economic aristocracy I offer, I repeat, no confi-
dent issue. His faith-just another faith it is-may be the right one
as to the organization of society which, if attainable and workably
enduring, would be best. It is doubtless arguable that with the in-
telligent, according to the test of their own or their progenitor's suc-
cess in the pecuniary competition, shall wisely go the governing of
society, while the rest of us shall accept our welfare as an incidental
by-product of a government conducted by them in furtherance of their
own interests and purposes. But I judge that in any case this is not
to be. In this connection I note a recent declaration of faith by Mr.
Charles M. Schwab: "I am not a socialist. I believe in aristocracy;
but only because I believe that the aristocracy of this country is the
aristocracy of men and women who do things-the aristocracy of ac-
complishment." More important with me, however, than the faith that
the aristocratically competitive order ought not to be, is the factual
conviction that it cannot enduringly be, and that the effort to achieve
or to maintain it is fraught with great intermediate dangers and pen-
alties. I proceed on the frank assumption that, for better or for worse,
political democracy is to come, and that, as intelligently as may be,
place must be made for it.
But it is neither mere faith nor dogmatic prophecy to assert that
political and economic democracy cannot exist apart. It is a foolish
temerity and an improvident stupidity to attempt to articulate politi-
cal democracy with economic aristocracy. One or the other must in the
long reckoning perish. On the issues both of fact and of worth I am a
democrat in the economic sense because I am a democrat in the politi-
cal sense.
I take it, therefore, that the modern world has to face the
question whether it will have political democracy under the competitive
order as over against some form of democratic collectivism. This issue
needs squarely to be faced. To plan for competition and for aristoc-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:35:53 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
