The
American Economic Review
Vol. XXII
March, 1932
PUSHING BACK THE FRONTIERS
No. 1
Presidential address delivered at Forty-fourth Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, Washington, D.C., December 29, 1931.
The early colonists settled along the Atlantic seaboard, but after the Revolution
they began to push westward across the Appalachian mountains. The physical frontier
had disappeared by 1890, but there were soon disclosed new frontiers of industry,
finance, and commerce, as well as cultural frontiers.
Great progress has been made in the physical sciences and in technology, yet even
in these fields there are many unsettled questions which remain as a challenge to
man's power.
Economic science has achieved great progress, and has made constructive contribu-
tions to human welfare, but the unsolved problems of today constitute another frontier.
The movement is now upward rather than outward and is raising cultural as well as
economic levels.
In 1763 the British government issued the Royal Proclamation which
forbade English colonists to settle west of the Allegheny mountains
except by special permission, a prohibition which stirred the ill will of
men of Massachusetts and Virginia alike and contributed to the creation
of the growing discontent which finally culminated in the Revolution.
But even before that event the paper frontier thus set up had been
crossed by roving individuals and by bands of adventurous men who
settled in the forbidden territory. And after the treaty of peace between
Great Britain and the new republic, no obstacle prevented the westward
movement except physical barriers and the resistance of the Indians.
Neither of these was able to stem the resistless surge of restless settlers
as they pressed on into the valley of the Ohio and the land to the south.
The fortunate purchase of the Louisiana territory opened up new vistas
and led to the later wresting of coveted California from a weaker neigh-
bor. Now the only limit to the westward movement was the Pacific Ocean,
and within seventy-five years from the Revolution, this had been reached.
It is perhaps incorrect to speak of this process of filling up the land
with settlers as pushing back the frontier, for in the changing kaleido-
scopic picture there were many frontiers. There was the trappers' and
fur traders' frontier, far beyond the fixed habitations of men, a fluctuat-
ing and retreating line which followed the disappearing fur-bearing
animals into the northwest and southwest, and then leaped the inter-
vening distances to the far west. The ranchers' frontier existed first
along the western fringe of the early colonies, but was pressed ever far-