requirements as to have lacked the disposition-measurably difficult
expedients, doubtless, all of them. But the decisive fact is that no
ultimate income borrowing could have been made to suffice for the need.
For a great war this method will not serve. No credible rate of interest
will attract the necessary degree of sacrifice, imposing sufficiently
drastic subtractions from individual incomes and the necessary restriction
of individual consumption. This can be accomplished, not by the
methods that work through inducement, but only by the taxes that leave
no choice. Nor could any rate of interest seriously effective in this
connection have avoided so drastic recapitalizations of property and
security values as to precipitate a financial hurricane. And correlative
bank rates must have been maintained, or directly or indirectly the
banks would have absorbed, on inflation terms, the issues of bonds. If
we were to rely on gigantic borrowing for war funds, we had to follow
the inflation method. Taxation was the sole alternative.
Doubtless it must be admitted that drastic taxation-there was no
escape from something drastic excepting in a small war-carries with
it dangers similar to those of high interest borrowing, but only in
minor degree. With narrowing residual incomes, some holders of securities
and other properties will be pressed to sell to get free funds.
Interest rates must advance appreciably, but not at all in the degree
attending the loan process-precisely because the necessary restrictions
of civilian consumption are left not to choice under the inducement of
higher interest rates but instead to the coercion of taxes. It is in
favor of taxes also that when one pays the tax he knows that he is so
far the poorer.

The buyer of bonds feels himself an investor, as

actually he is. Bonds placed with banks or carried by them for buyers
bring inflation, huge and swollen national debts, future taxes, inflation-
swollen, upward shifting prices-and therewith such increased
civilian economy as rising prices on the one side may afford as against
rising profits on the other. Borrowing from ultimate incomes, in the
degree of its possibility, brings only a slight inflation, no appreciable
upward shift of general prices, future taxes, economy of civilian consumption,
sharp advances in interest rates, and a disastrous readjustment
in property and security values. Taxation brings an even less
appreciable inflation, a closer approximation to stability in prices, a
more marked economy in civilian consumption, relatively slight changes
in interest rates, and a relative immunity from financial disturbance.
Had America followed the English rates of taxation, it need not, I believe,
have resorted to either type of borrowing.

And here the analysis returns to my main point of emphasis. Taxes
avoid bonds. Because the war was financed in the main by the inflating