or the regulation of products and of markets. When the individual
effort at gain appears to concur with the common good, as in the growing
of corn or the spinning of cotton-perhaps also in the culture of
silk and in the providing of champagne, face powder, and cigarettes—
the state may well keep hands off. All interference is a question of
expediency and not of ultimate ethical imperatives, a problem of the
costs and perplexities of the attempted control set over against the
putative good to be achieved. But government, the coercive control of
some things, is as necessary as are any of the things controlled. It is
only the anarchist that condemns all collectively coercive activities.
There is, then, as little validity in the wholesale denunciation of collectivism
as in the wholesale advocacy of it. The all-inclusive governmental
problem is to conform the working of individual activity to the
interests of the common welfare. For it is obvious that the sum of
individual welfares can report the sum of general welfare only so far
as the individual good is attained neither through parasitism nor predation.
A rational society will combine liberty and authority. Always
the problem is to draw lines of wise adjustment between the antithetical
principles. Subjected, then, to the test of the common good, neither
collectivism nor individualism can make its exclusive case.
The proximate

ideal of society, perhaps also the ultimate ideal (about this last
I know something less even than I care) is that of individualism, collectively
controlled and supplemented-competition under collective
limitation. Never in society has there workably been, nor ever, as I
hold, will there wisely be, nor ever-in the absence of cataclysmic and
disastrous change will there credibly be a systematic collectivism or
a systematic individualism or, for that matter, a systematic and logical
anything else. Under conditions of orderly and wholesome development,
systematic collectivism equally with systematic anarchism is a
dream of mad logicians. As well look for flourishing life under absolute
zero of cold or in unlimited heat. Societies are not thus monistic.
They are dualistic in principle of organization, precisely because they
are societies made up of individuals.

I protest then against the wastes of intellectual energy and of practical
effectiveness that attend the division of forward-looking men into
opposing doctrinaire schools of thought as to ultimate ideals in social
organization or as to the ultimate destination of society. I urge that
all constructive emphasis be centered on the near-by things. The thing
to do is always the next thing. It is a tragic waste of social forces to
divide on remote and rear-ground issues. The immediate problems are
difficult enough and are pressing. With the ameliorative program so
conceived and so limited, the agreements are vastly more important than