VOL. X
The
American Economic Review
MARCH, 1920
THE NATURE OF OUR ECONOMIC PROBLEM¹
No. 1
There can be no question that for the student of economics the
war has been a distinct boon. The strain to which our economic
system was suddenly subjected has thrown new light on its struc-
ture and working, has revealed weaknesses in current economic
reasoning, and suggested new evaluations of the forces at work in
economic life. Such an experience is bound to add to the body of
economic knowledge and suggest new methods of approach to
economic problems. That such has been the case there is abundant
evidence in the papers and discussions at our annual meetings.
Some economists, indeed, seem to have lost faith in the general
validity of the principles of economic science as it has been gradu-
ally built up since the time of Adam Smith, to believe that it must
be in large measure discarded and an effort made to build on new
foundations. There are various reasons for this feeling: the fail-
ure of economists to predict accurately the effect of the war upon
the course of economic events; the progress made in the study of
psychology and its bearing upon the understanding of the motives
of human action; the feeling that economic reasoning has been
based upon the assumption of the permanence of existing insti-
tutions, failing to recognize both that these institutions are sub-
ject to change and that they are themselves the controlling factors
in economic life and should therefore furnish the main body of ma-
terial for economic science. None of these criticisms is new but
the proceedings of our recent meetings show that they are being
urged with special force at the present time.
While no economist would for a moment suggest that his science
has reached, or ever will reach, its final form, while the experience
through which we are passing and the criticisms to which reference
has been made may contain contributions of great value to its
progress,
it may
be questioned whether they are as destructive in
their effect as some would appear to believe. Prediction is the
severest test to which our knowledge can be put. It is possible
1 Presidential address delivered at the Thirty-second Annual Meeting of
the American Economic Association held in Chicago, December 29, 1919.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:34:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
