A decade before, indeed, tradition has it that Pitt had come under
Smith's influence, and thereafter "always confessed himself as one of
Smith's most convinced disciples.'

Mr. Rae has written of the young

statesman “reforming the national finances with the Wealth of Nations
in his hand," and Buckle long ago cited Pulteney's appeal to "the
authority of Dr. Smith who, it was well said, would persuade the
present generation, and govern the next." But recent studies have
tended to qualify this wholesale ascription. Rose insists that the influence
of Adam Smith upon Pitt has been exaggerated; Rees maintains
that even in his administrative reforms Pitt was influenced "less
by Adam Smith than by the Committee of Public Accounts (of 1785),""
and Kennedy, contesting the view that the Wealth of Nations brought
to the world a new revelation of the principles of taxation, declares
bluntly that Smith merely "gave a wide intellectual sanction to a set
of opinions already very influential" and that "all the large changes
(in taxation) since his day.... have been made independently, or in
spite of the influence of his ideas."¹2

Certainly, with the alarms of war, economic philosophy yielded to
economic opportunism. From 1793 on, through Pitt's death in 1806,
up to the end of the great struggle, the impress of Adam Smithwhatever
it may have been-was felt in the world of thought, not in
the domain of affairs.

Adam Smith's mantle descended upon Dugald Stewart. But with it
came no direct access of practical influence. Reaction, born of the
Terror, was in the air; and, discriminating critic and eloquent expositor
though he might be, Stewart was not temperamentally of the
stuff of academic martyrs. “I have been so uniformly impressed with
a sense of the importance of my situation" (as professor of moral
philosophy at Edinburgh)-he wrote in apologetic reply to Lord
Abercromby's alarm-“that among all the interesting questions which
have, during the last nine years, divided our political parties, I have
never introduced the slightest reference to any of them excepting in
the single instance of the African trade, on which I formerly expressed
myself with some warmth;—and even these expressions I dropped from
my course, as soon as it became matter of public discussion."3
Apart from Adam Smith and Dugald Stewart we search vainly in the


**period before 1800 for any considerable influence of economic opinion
Ibid., p. 404.

History of Civilization in England, vol. I, ch. 4, p. 61.
10 William Pitt and National Revival (1912), p. 183.
11

"A Short Fiscal and Financial History of England, 1815-1918 (1921), p. 11.
"English Taxation, 1640-1799 (1913), pp. 141-2; in Rees, op. cit., p. 225.
13 John Veitch, A Memoir of Dugald Stewart in Collected Works of Dugald
Stewart (ed. Hamilton), vol. X, lxxiv.**
