enough that a mature industry continues its activity at a high level on a
horizontal plane. The fact that new railroad mileage continued to be built
at about the same rate through the seventies, eighties and nineties was not
sufficient. It is the cessation of growth which is disastrous. It is in connection
with the growth, maturity and decline of great industries that the principle
of acceleration operates with peculiar force. And when giant new industries
have spent their force, it may take a long time before something else of
equal magnitude emerges. In fact nothing has emerged in the decade in
which we are now living. This basic fact, together with the virtual cessation
of public investment by state and local governmental bodies, as indicated by
a decline of $2,000,000,000 in their net public debt since 1932, explains in
large measure the necessary rise in federal expenditures.6
Spiethoff was quite right when he argued that a vigorous recovery is not
just spontaneously born from the womb of the preceding depression. Some
small recovery must indeed arise sooner or later merely because of the growing
need for capital replacement. But a full-fledged recovery calls for something
more than the mere expenditure of depreciation allowances. It requires
a large outlay on new investment, and this awaits the development of great
new industries and new techniques. But such new developments are not
currently available in adequate volume. It is my growing conviction that the
combined effect of the decline in population growth, together with the failure
of any really important innovations of a magnitude sufficient to absorb
large capital outlays, weighs very heavily as an explanation for the failure
of the recent recovery to reach full employment. Other factors are certainly
significant and important, particularly our failure to control the cost structure
and to grapple effectively with specific situations, such as those presented
by the railroads and by building construction.

We have noted that the approaching cessation of population growth
and the disappearance of new territory for settlement and exploitation may
cut off a half or more of the investment outlets which we were wont to
make in the past. We are thus compelled to fall back upon that measure of
capital formation which is associated with the advance of technique and the
rise in per capita output. But current institutional developments are restricting
even this outlet. The growing power of trade unions and trade associations,
the development of monopolistic competition, of rivalry for the
market through expensive persuasion and advertising, instead of through
price competition, are factors which have rightly of late commanded much
attention among economists. There is, moreover, the tendency to block the
advance of technical progress by the shelving of patents.
Under vigorous price competition, new cost-reducing techniques were
compulsorily introduced even though the scrapping of obsolete but undepreciated


**6 Debts and Recovery 1929 to 1937, The Twentieth Century Fund, 1938, p. 230.**