tial materials. To these ends there were alternative means: administrative
bargaining on patriotic basis; commandeering, potential or
actual; non-inflationary financing; licensing of fuel supply; control
of transport facilities; appropriation of war profits. It is by no
means clear that the objects in view would have been better servedeven
as well served-by any or all of these methods as by direct pricefixing.
But a statement to the contrary is quite as unwarranted. Until
there has been a fuller inquest-attended by more than ordinary difficulties
in which will be weighed the consequences of what was done,
compared with the possible results of what might have been done―
the final verdict must be withheld.

That, however, which is certain, is that the determination of policy—
or, if a less conscious procedure be emphasized, the initial step-in
essence, a radical departure from accepted economic opinion and practice
was taken deliberately, almost leisurely, without either that expert
canvass of the problem or that consultative regard for scientific
opinion which even in war time is the requisite of administrative
efficiency.

3. The nation approached its war financing with the fairest prospect
of actual practice conforming to sound theory. The necessity
of revenue provision on a vast scale had been admitted; the policy of a
relatively large ratio of taxes to loans had been adopted; the danger
of "the very serious hardship which would be likely to arise out of
inflation" had been set forth in a presidential utterance; expert counsel
had been summoned in the preparation of the tax schedule.
Definite adherence to this program would have meant sound war
financing. But at an early stage the straight hard road of taxation
and funding was left for the treacherous ease of "finance by bank
credits." Thereafter our war financing had primary regard for fiscal
convenience and business advantage to the neglect of general wellbeing.
To supply the exchequer readily and painlessly with ample
funds, bank credit was utilized in the form of certificate borrowing—
with the consequences of deposit and note inflation, rising prices and
social injustice."

A careful student of "the political economy of war" has pointed
out that "finance by bank credits”—“inherently bad" and to be restricted
"within the narrowest possible limits," though it be is likely
to be resorted to even by strong governments at war, because of "the
fear of popular resentment against high taxation in an overt form”
and "the fear that an offer of very high interest upon loans might
make upon neutrals an impression of financial weakness."


**9932

3¹Cf. the present writer's “Inflation" in The Annals (Phila.), May 1920.
32Pigou, The Political Economy of War (1921), pp. 110-1.**