8
J. M. Clark
[March
governing the actual reactions of business men bids fair to defy systematic
analysis. We shall probably be wrestling with these difficulties for some
time to come.
The fact is that as we enter the realm of dynamic and quantitative prob-
lems, we face more and more exacting demands. The certainties of equilib-
rium theory, hypothetical though they were, are replaced by stubborn un-
certainties; and the most careful students are the least ready to present
final answers. The mills of quantitative research grind slowly, and may
never produce certainties on many of the larger issues. Hence, the humility
which the responsible student must needs feel, even after footing up a
large total of achievement by his science of economics during the past
fifty years.
Equilibrium theory assumed that what is saved is spent; that purchasing
power arising from production is used and flows back into further produc-
tion. Now we ask if this is true, and find evidence of discrepancies. If we
spend more for some one thing, shall we have less left to spend on other
things, or more? The answer begins with: "It depends." Are imports an
addition to our national dividend and exports a subtraction, or vice versa?
We have no ready-made answer. We cannot combat old heresies with the
same whole-hearted confidence as our predecessors there may be some-
thing in them. And in this mood of doubtful potency we entered the grav-
est crisis of economic policy which this country has faced since the slavery
question.
Economics and the World Crisis
If we try to assess the part economists have played in this crisis, the
result is likely to be confusing. If our criterion is the part they have played
in shaping policy, we find that a few economists have played a strategic
part, while many more have rendered able and conscientious service in
subordinate positions, below the levels at which policies were formed. If
we ask instead whether economists have been able to reach substantial
agreement on proposed measures, we find that there has been a consider-
able measure of agreement, though far short of unanimity; but this agree-
ment has quite commonly been contrary to the policies actually followed.
The greatest approach to unanimity probably came in the condemnation of
a high tariff. This was a standard reaction on the part of the economists;
and the politicians countered with their own standard reaction-by ignoring
it.
The unfortunate fact seems to be that the consensus of economists has
no absolute authority, and no right to claim it. Scientific truth is not to be
certified by a general counting of noses, even the noses of economists.
The results of new and untried measures can seldom if ever be predicted
with scientific certainty. Within the margin of doubt, economists, like
others, will follow their preconceptions; the minority view may happen
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:50:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
