studies a rough series of transitional forms may be traced between the
two poles of research, between the narrative of the individual sequence,
especially characteristic of political history, and the emerging science
which essays, by the comparative method, the discovery of the laws or
continuities of group action. There must be and must remain the
detailed description of the single specimen, the individual sequence.
The art of historical narrative will not die. But, as with the aid
of all the kindred social sciences, the records become more adequate
and their interpretation more penetrating, history, or rather some
branches of the craft, may approximate an historical sociology. The
interdependence of the sciences is already exhibited in the use which the
social historians, as well as the political scientists, are beginning to make
of statistics, or at least in the demand for training which will enable
them to check quantitatively their descriptive studies.
L. P. Namier's recent book on the structure of English politics at the
accession of George III is an example of this use of statistics. Despairing
of gaining fresh insights from the accustomed sources, such as the
gouty bon mots of Horace Walpole's letters, or the acrid outcries against
the nabobs, or the mutual diatribes of parties against the corruption
practised by opponents, Mr. Namier undertook the compilation of a
card-index containing the fullest details, especially from local records,
family and local correspondence, concerning every member of the House
of Commons from 1760 to 1783. After years of this minute inquiry,
he has published this notable initial study. His text is shot through
with numerical tests of such problems as the extent of aristocratic influence
upon the representative system, or how much voting power was
exerted by the new wealthy class, or the weight of the Crown and Administration
in elections, or the supposedly prevalent corruption of the
electorate.

As each generation thus rewrites its history of the past-a proceeding
necessary because of defective records and because of the shifts
in selective interest and in the configuration of contemporary biasessome
of the gaps in the record become partially filled. But no amount
of research or tenable conjecture can eke out the most serious silences
of our sources. This is particularly true in certain fields of economic
history. Such institutional structures as the open field system, the
craft gilds, or the factory, which have left behind them a record of
customary regulations or external legislation, have, like the skeletal
forms of zoological species, deposited their fossils in the historical strata.
But the more dynamic elements, like the vital organs and the nervous
system, have tended to disappear. We can with considerable accuracy
reconstruct these economic institutions in what we may term their skeletal
form; but how and why they came into being, what animating forces