1926]
Economics and War
William James wrote a famous essay on the "The Moral Equivalents
of War." Conceivably we might speak of equivalents or substitutes
for economic antagonisms. But what we need most are substitutes for
the habitual patterns which elicit and direct those antagonisms.
Something may be accomplished, undoubtedly, by continued emphasis
upon the wasteful stupidity of most of the efforts national govern-
ments make to secure economic advantages outside of their own terri-
tories, although this something is not very much. But there is reason
to hope that with the increase in the number and variety of contacts
between the peoples of different countries, national antagonisms will
diminish. Not, however, that the growth of concreter forms of
knowledge, born of such contacts, can be counted upon to dissipate
our abstract notions of alien types of men and of rational but
malevolent states. The real ground for hope is rather that with the
growth of communication and of economic interpenetration, new forms
of organization will have to be devised.
Organization generally provides a mechanism by means of which
some measure of external control can be exercised over men's activities.
But that is only a small part of its significance. Organization directs
activities as well as controls them.
The world's political organization has not kept pace with its eco-
nomic organization. Increasing interdependence asserts itself in
economic life. Raw materials, markets, borrowing and lending, trade
routes, prices, monetary and banking policies are things in which the
different peoples of the world have a joint as well as a separate
interest.
National states, each acting only for itself, are inefficient guardians
of these joint interests. Within a nation's own boundaries it manages
to bring the conflicting interests of different sections and groups into
some sort of balance and to enforce general standards and rules
governing the conduct of business enterprise. Just because there are
these rules of the game, because political organization is nation-wide,
the game itself takes on a different character, the nature and the
meaning of sectional conflict is changed. An American scholar who
has thrown a new and transforming light on our national history has
said: "We must frankly face the fact that in this vast and hetero-
geneous nation, this sister of all Europe, regional geography is a
fundamental fact%; that the American peace has been achieved by
restraining sectional selfishness and assertiveness and by coming to
agreements rather than to reciprocal denunciations or to blows....
Statesmanship in this nation consists not only in representing the
special interests of the leader's own section, but in finding a formula
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 01:20:55 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
