1936] Accomplishments and Prospects of American Economics
9
to be right; and the government will be free to select those theories and
proposals which best fit the tone of the administrative mind.
This difficulty will probably always be with us. In the face of it, what
is the best we can do? Few would nowadays attempt to draw solutions
ready-made from traditional theories. I can think of instances which approx-
imate this, but they are rare. And the economist who does this is hardly
less risky a guide than the one who follows the more popular course,
throwing all received theories overboard and trying to work out every prob-
lem as a fresh and disconnected exercise. What is needed is a readiness
to use accepted theories, and the methods by which they were derived,
as tools of analysis, with a clear eye for the limitations of their applicability
to the specific conditions of the problem in hand, and a readiness to make
the theories over, if need be, on a basis of changed assumptions. In short,
what is needed is thinking which is free, but disciplined. A few of us are
like soldiers going through the manual of arms in the face of the enemy;
more of us are throwing away our guns because we see no use in the
manual. Neither of these is the way to win battles.
I have already said that this present crisis marks an epoch in the relation
of government to business. Earlier controls dealt with localized sections
of industry, applying standards derived from the unregulated field; or
they dealt with particular incidental aspects other than the central question
what and how much to produce and at what price. Now we are dealing
with industry as a whole and going to the core of the matter. Earlier con-
trols dealt mainly in restraints on particular abuses; the present problem
is not one of restraints on abuses of vigorous private activities, but one of
supplying motive force itself where motive force is lacking. Earlier attacks
left unquestioned the main redeeming feature of private industry-its
power to produce goods plentifully and efficiently; now this main redeem-
ing feature is called in question. And apparently few leaders of private
industry yet realize the seriousness of the situation.
The issue seems to be wrongly put by many, who ask whether in the
face of the weakness of private industry and our fumbling attempts to
deal with it, the present system of private industry can be maintained. The
answer seems clear. If the system persists, its character will be changed
until it will no longer be the present system. If change does not come
through governmental action, it will come through inevitable developments
in industry itself. The system has been changing its character constantly
during the last hundred and fifty years, and as much through the action
of industry as that of government. More changes are in store; and we can
set no ultimate limit on their extent.
The present system is failing to use the productive powers it has so
plentifully developed, and to give everyone an opportunity to produce and
to earn a living. Can a system which will do these things be fashioned
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:50:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
