1930]
Historical Records
50
actuated them in their prime and gradually ebbed in their decline, are
questions not easy to answer from our materials.
Take, for a simple instance, the flow of trade as a formative influence
on industrial institutions. Of foreign commerce, its agents and car-
riers and its extent, we have, for the pre-statistical period, some frag-
ments of information; but for local or domestic trade the material is
almost hopelessly inadequate. Very difficult and elusive is also the
study of past changes in the standards of living. The record of economic
history is therefore unevenly weighted, tempting us to stress successive
stages of production and to neglect the dynamic factors of distribution
and consumption.¹ Even our current statistical record is notably weak
on domestic trade, and the analysis, statistical and other, of the as-
sumptions underlying the demand curve is inadequate. We shall have
in 1930 the first national enumeration of the agencies and amounts of
market distribution; and this will be warmly welcomed by economists
for the help it may give at this much needed point.
But why should a busy world produce statistics for the delight of
economists? We are told that economists are a voracious species, greedy
for figures, only to be satisfied when census-takers and social psycholo-
gists stand beside the remaining third of the working population. By
implication, we should be satisfied with the existing notable increase in
our equipment for economic and social measurement since the World
War. Nearly all the departments of the federal government are busy
turning out statistical tables in growing volume, but as yet too little
coördinated.
Numerous state, regional and local agencies are doing likewise. Trade
organizations, university research bureaus, independent institutes, priv-
ate investigators fill the country with questionnaires and statistical pub-
lications. And still further plans for quantitative research, nation-wide
and local, are constantly emerging. Is not all this more than enough,
asks the business man? The economist answers with an emphatic nega-
tive. Our modern world stands but at the threshold of the "statistical
period" for which the meager but gradually accumulating statistical
1 Thorold Rogers had a naïve habit of treating his hypotheses as facts. Hewitt's
study of medieval Cheshire records has recently shown up this foible. Rogers
first expressed doubt regarding Cheshire's medieval salt production, a commodity of
prime importance, and thereupon he converted the doubt into a flat denial. This bald
assertion was apparently based on the absence of Cheshire salt from the record of
price quotations. But Hewitt's researches (cf. H. J. Hewitt, Medieval Cheshire,
1929, pp. 108-112) make it evident that the Cheshire brine springs were continuously
worked and that, though the data in regard to distribution are very scanty, the
number of recorded salt-houses far exceeded the needs of local consumption. In other
words, the strata of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries show plenty of skeletal
forms of production; but the evidence as to the considerable trade which created them
was never recorded or has almost vanished.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:44:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
