12
Harry A. Millis
[March
product. Other things equal, the smaller the share going in wages, the
more rapid is saving and investment and the greater the risk of industrial
miscarriage. Beyond this, opportunity for investment is limited by the
possibilities of consumption. Investments must be supported by capacity to
buy and consume. And, it may be added, it is difficult to see what signifi-
cance industrial progress has unless it adds in large measure to the welfare
of the masses of the people. Labor's general doctrine of "progressing" wages
cannot be dismissed.
What should be done about wages in time of depression? Business men
who pay wages, and economists, have been dominated by the belief that
wage rates must be reduced in depression in order that the employer, with
lower labor costs, may successfully compete, and that necessary profit may
be realized, investment induced and business enterprise revived. Organized
labor in the present depression has held that wage rates should be increased
so that consuming power may be expanded and an adequate market pro-
vided. It is no secret that this position has colored the New Deal.
In so far as this concerns recovery as against reconstruction, the position
taken by organized labor must be regarded as a mistaken one when applied
in private industry motivated by prospect of profit. As seen by those who
for profit pay wages, costs are too high because wages are too high; higher
wages cause fewer to be hired; purchasing power may be smaller when
wage rates are high than when they are low.
Economists rather generally believe that in normal and especially in
boom times good policy calls for progressing wage rates, which the traffic
can and should bear, but that in depression wage maintenance or enhance-
ment is at the expense of recovery and volume of employment. They do not
believe in inelastic or in increased wages in depression. In their view, wage
brakes should be applied in booms, but should be released in depression.
High wages do not serve as a self-starter.
With this I agree, when recovery rather than reform is the objective. My
differences with some of the fraternity have to do with important phases
often regarded as minor points. Frequently, it seems to me, wage reduction
is entirely too much emphasized as a means of recovery. It is unfortunate
that there is limited recognition of the fact that reductions in non-labor
costs and fixed charges are just as important for lowering total costs and
restoring profit. There is a great problem of sticky prices of many things,
especially of building materials and of goods entering into capital equip-
ment. This problem has increased under the New Deal. There is also
a problem of heavy fixed charges due to unwarranted emphasis upon mort-
gage bonds in corporation finance. The bondholder is insured as against
everyone else. My second point is that good policy rejects wage cuts until
waste and other elements in costs have been removed or deflated. Efficiency,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:56:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
