the money income of the citizen; and (2) the citizen should dictate
to the state what shall be produced in return for that income. The
former provision would insure that the interests of citizens generally
would not be sacrificed to the interests of particular individuals; the
latter provision would insure that the peculiarities of tastes and needs
characteristic of each individual would not be sacrificed to some standard
of consumption set up by an all-powerful state.

I have argued that the proposed plan for guiding the production of
commodities in a socialist state, viewed in its general outline, is essentially
sound. As respects the more specific provisions of that plan,
which I have enumerated, I shall pass by the first three as needing no
defense, and take up at once the fourth, which is the provision that the
authorities of our socialist state, in fixing the price to be paid by the
citizen for any particular commodity, ought to set that price at a point
which covered completely the cost of producing that commodity and
that said authorities ought to interpret the cost of producing a given
commodity to be its resources-cost, the drain on the community's store
or income of primary factors which resulted from producing a unit of
said commodity. Is this doctrine sound? Would it really be the correct
thing for the authorities to fix the selling price of any commodity
at cost in this sense?

To this question, the affirmative answer is surely the right one. A
single consideration is decisive: That price which equals resourcescost
is the only price which would be consistent with the income system
supposed to have been already decided upon. That system, we remember,
gives to each citizen a determinate money income to be employed
as he sees fit in buying commodities from the state. But, since substantially
all commodities which the citizen is permitted to buy, that is,
consumption commodities, have to be produced, the authorities of the
state, in deciding that a particular citizen shall have a certain money
income, one, let us suppose, of two thousand dollars,-have thereby
virtually decided that said citizen shall have an incontestable claim upon
two thousand dollars' worth of the productive resources of the state;
and that proposition, in turn, means that said citizen shall have an
incontestable right to dictate to the economic authorities just what
commodities they shall produce from his two thousand dollars' worth
of the productive resources of the community. From this reasoning it.
necessarily follows that the authorities could not consistently make the
selling-price of our hypothetical sewing machine greater than its resources-
cost of thirty dollars; since doing so would in effect reduce
the money income of the citizen interested, though it had previously
been decided that said money income was just what it ought to be. On
the other hand, it is equally evident that the authorities could not