1934]
Constructive Statecraft
5
them. Further, any given society will always find its institutional mecha-
nisms inadequate and imperfect, because changing conditions create new
needs and problems for which self-regulating mechanisms cannot instant-
ly be created. Regulation is thus essential even in a society that tends
to be self-regulating.
Closely associated with this fact of imperfection in social organiza-
tion is the problem of monopoly. Though generally recognized and ex-
tensively discussed, monopoly was assumed to be a mere incidental in-
trusion into a social system that was predominantly and naturally com-
petitive. The older theory assumed monopoly to be foreign to the natural
order of a contractual society, though both natural and legal monopo-
lies were recognized. This position was in part justified by the older
theoretical contention that monopoly price emerged only under condi-
tions of substantially complete control of supply. All intermediate con-
ditions between pure competition and pure monopoly were presumed to
reveal an essentially competitive price structure. Recent developments
in theoretical analysis have completely overthrown this view; and we
must consequently recognize that important monopolistic powers emerge
over an extensive range of cases of monopolistic competition. We are
thus forced to recognize that society is not inherently competitive. The
range of effective competition is much narrower than was long supposed,
and doubtless we may say with truth that competition has never been
effectively organized over the major part of trade and commerce. The
regulation of monopoly is thus a much more important field of activity
than the classical economists assumed it to be, and their own principles
now require an extension of the activity of the state far beyond any
limits that they would have supposed to be essential.
The modern liberal thus believes that social evolution is a constructive
process which involves active participation of both individuals and state.
There is no guiding hand other than the collective wisdom of each gen-
eration. By reason of persistent imperfection and maladjustment, the
remedial activities of the state must needs be extensive; and, as monopoly
is ever present over a wide field, vigorous regulation is essential to the
protection of the welfare of the public. Modern liberalism thus presents
an entirely new outlook on life, despite a certain continuity of thought.
that really reaches back to the sixteenth century philosophy of the
Commonweal.
The full significance of these extensions of the range of state activity
will be more explicitly perceived if we turn to some contemporary prob-
lems. Any development of national planning might seem to be wholly
inconsistent with the basic concepts of liberalism. Planned or regulated
production of certain basic mineral products can be urged by the lib-
eral on two important counts: conservation of primary resources in the
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:45:52 UTC 12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
