The historian of another age is likely to appraise our own day as
disturbed in thought, no less than restless in action. The shock of
the Great War brought mental bewilderment with dislocated affairs.
Accepted creeds were challenged as smug conventions, and primary
faiths wrenched from traditional security-groped for firm stands.
Theology, politics, philosophy, economics, felt this upheaval. Like
Serapion, the pious believer lamented the old anchorage and cried for
a new god.

It was the basic social concept-the trend of human affairs—that
suffered most. Seven years ago the doctrine of progress might have
been fairly described as a scientific verity. Barring the pessimism of
a philosophical cult, the receding postulates of Marxism and the occasional
rationalist crying in the wilderness, there was no formal dissent
from the principle of progressive betterment in human affairs. The
pendulum was to swing far. In 1919 a regius professor of history,
in the detachment of doctrinal review could declare :²
"The progress

of humanity belongs to the same order of ideas as Providence or personal
immortality. It is true or false, and like them it cannot be
proved either true or false. Belief in it is an act of faith."
-even worse,

A century

From this frank agnosticism there developed two variants. The
one, an extreme rebound from implicit acceptance, was naturally
enough sheer negation. Not progress but blind chanceoutright
retrogression-is the order of social movement.

and a half ago, Adam Smith-as after him, the whole train of classical
economists through John Stuart Mill-had indeed fashioned the concept
of a retrograde as against a progressive or a stationary society.
But the blight was specific and remediable: "the sensible decay" of
"the revenue and stock of its inhabitants" making up "the funds
destined for the maintenance of labor." The older economics, any
more than the older philosophy, had no place for a necessitarian
doctrine of social decline.

War gave way to Reconstruction, and the menace of arms yielded