6
Jacob Viner
[March
legal framework and legal folklore to which legislative drafting and the
administration of the laws must conform; and second, his lack of experi-
ence and insight with respect to what is and what is not administratively
feasible. These are omitted, however, not because the ordinary economist
does have command of these skills, and not because they are unimportant,
for such is decidedly not the case in either instance. But barriers to effec-
tiveness of this general type, instead of being peculiar to economic theorists,
are common to all kinds of specialized participants in a coöperative enter-
prise such as policy-formulation which makes demands upon a wider
range of skills than single individuals can reasonably be expected to
possess. The lack of legal and administrative training on the part of the
economic theorist may be regrettable, but it is not fatal as long as he is
not permitted to decide policy questions all on his own.
In the ordinary course of events, policy is, of course, ultimately decided
not by the technical experts as such, whether they be economists or engi-
neers or political scientists or sociologists, but by the legislators and the
responsible executives with the aid of advice by the experts. That excellent
formula, "The expert should be on tap, not on top" would be almost
equally valid if it went, "The expert is on tap, not on top." This applies no
more and no less to the economist than to the other professions-except for
the lawyer, who is on tap and on top, and omnipresent, omniscient,
omnipotent, and omnivorous in addition. In the process of tapping the
experts for their specialized knowledge and skills, the technical equip-
ment of one profession provides the offset for the gaps in the capacities
of the others. And for those many things which in a world not clearly
designed for full comprehension by man are beyond human knowledge, the
lawyer always stands ready to provide precise formulae acceptable to the
Supreme Court as unambiguous expressions of legislative intent.
Even with these two items omitted, the list of handicaps of the academic
economic theorist as a participant in the formulation of public policy
which I have given is discouragingly long. Others, moreover, would prob-
ably think they could easily make it even longer and even more discourag-
ing to the theorist. Let it be clear, however, that I am not identifying
the few "academic economic theorists" with economists in general, and
that I recognize that there are many other types of economists whose
serviceability in policy-formulation and in other activities of government has
been amply and unquestionably demonstrated.
The non-theoretical economist, in particular, or the economist who dis-
claims any theoretical prejudices, is in fact much more adaptable to public
service than the economic theorist with some body of theory to which
he remains faithful, whatever its species. The non-theorist can adjust
himself quickly to the changing flow of events and issues. He is not bound
by any set mode of analysis. His mind but lightly encumbered by doctrines,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 20Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
