formed empiricism, so the problem of labor remuneration was ap-
proached with a premature idealism. From insistence that the out-
break of war must not serve as a pretext to sweep away accredited
industrial defences, to endeavor that the exigencies of war be used to
elevate wage levels to an imperfectly ascertained, inexpertly administer-
ed standard of comfort—this is a far cry, the sharp echoes of which
were certain to ring in the nation's ears long after the event.
9928
It was
2. Price-fixing has been recently described as "one of the most
important economic novelties that resulted from the war.'
novel not in the sense of a new and untried device: but rather,
in that it jettisoned accredited economic opinion. No rubric in our
creed seemed more secure, none more safely an induction from historical
experience, nor more firmly buttressed upon primary economic axioms
than the unwisdom of a legal price maximum.
An appeal to doctrinal authority is no sufficient logic in the political
economy of war. Inter arma silent leges may be invoked as to opinion
as well as to affairs-when the nation's existence is in the balance.
A distinguished leader in the financial world has defended a somewhat
like election in an epigram: “It was patriotism that for the time
being displaced or disregarded economic laws. or principles.""
Obviously, we have to do here with the fineness of our scientific texture.
Even patriotism may not flout the conservation of energy or the
combustion of gases or bacterial incubation. Certainly economic uni-
formities, even the best of them, are not as the corner-stones of physics,
chemistry and biology. But before propulsion into the outer darkness
they are, at least, entitled to a day in court with counsel for the
defense from their own exponents. And this as to the adoption―
adoption, remember, not operation of the policy of price-fixing was
denied the economist.
9930
A competent participant, judicial but sympathetic, has said in re-
view: “Government price-fixing during the war was not uniform in
its objects, and was little guided by principles or deliberate policies.
In the main, it was opportunist, feeling its way from case to case."
This concerns a later matter, into which-tempting as is the invitation
—it is not permitted to enter. But however faint the praise as to
**practice, incomparably less even than this may be said as to the spirit
of entry. There were definite ends to be attained: the protection of
the public in fuel and food; the protection of the government in essen-
28Simpson, "Price Fixing and the Theory of Profit" in Quarterly Journal of Econo-
mics, November, 1919, p. 138.
29 James B. Forgan, in AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW, March, 1920, Supplement,
pp. 177-8.
Taussig, "Price-Fixing as seen by a Price-Fixer," in Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, February, 1919, p. 238.**