2
O. M. W. Sprague
[March
by the temporary expedient of liberal government expenditure. Agri-
culture is doubtless in better position than four years ago, although its
improvement rests upon the unsatisfactory and somewhat unstable founda-
tion of resisted output. On the other hand, the industries producing capital
goods have shown little sign of complete recovery, and such moderate
recovery as has been made in rather laggard fashion has recently been
reversed. Clearly it is the development of conditions under which there
shall be a large and maintained increase in the demand for the products
of the heavy industries that is required for recovery. Further expansion in
the consumer-goods industries cannot take place upon a solid foundation
unless it is supported by increased employment in the heavy industries.
It is sometimes said in business circles that nothing more than confidence
is required to induce activity in the production of capital goods. This seems
to me a most superficial view since it is at least quite possible, as has hap-
pened at times in recent years, that a mere wave of confidence will result in
the creation of conditions which will speedily check expansion in this direc-
tion. A widespread advance in costs and prices, for example, in the products
of the heavy industries under the favorable influence of a wave of confidence
would not only be likely to check expansion, but would also create addi-
tional obstacles in the way of subsequent improvement. Much the same
observation may be ventured regarding changes in, or the repeal of, the
undistributed profits tax and the capital gains tax. They would seem to
me to be minor obstacles, the removal of which, however desirable, would
in itself be far from sufficient to bring about recovery.
At this point I cannot resist the temptation to mention another obstacle
in the way of recovery that is also doubtless of secondary importance. I
refer to the growing tendency to rely upon forecasts of business conditions
in the determination of business policies. Were an individual to have his
blood pressure and blood count taken at frequent intervals, surely a very
bad psychological effect would result-similarly with business, when atten-
tion is constantly fixed upon the gyrations of security quotations on our
stock exchange, and upon the various indices of business conditions sup-
plied by numerous statistical agencies and financial soothsayers. This habit,
I am confident, contributes not a little to accentuate business fluctuations.
It leads to a speeding up of production and the accumulation of inventories
of raw and finished goods when the signal is green, and to precipitate
stoppages when a yellow or red light is indicated. Here, also perhaps, is
found some part of the explanation of short-sighted advances in prices
upon the appearance of an incipient increase in demand and the resultant
contraction of output which follows upon its consequent shrinkage.
I shall not dwell further upon these secondary obstacles to investment,
the number of which could readily be still further enlarged. After all,
something more than the removal of obstacles is needed to bring about a
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:51:49 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
