by fostering inventiveness, in turn facilitated, he thought, division of labor
and so the production of wealth. Thus he arrived at an optimistic conclusion.
Population growth, he held, stimulated progress and this in turn stimulated
further growth and expansion. In contrast, the pessimistic analyses of
Malthus and Ricardo stressed the limitation of natural resources and the
danger of an increasing population's pressing down the margin of cultivation
to a point at which real income would be reduced to a bare subsistence
level. In this static analysis the more dynamic approach of Adam Smith was
quite forgotten. If we wish to get a clear insight into the economic consequences
of the current decline in population growth, it is necessary to return
to the suggestion of Adam Smith and to explore more fully the causal interconnection
between economic progress, capital formation and population
growth.

Economic analysis from the earliest development of our science has been
concerned with the rôle played by economic progress. Various writers have
included under this caption different things; but for our purpose we may say
that the constituent elements of economic progress are (a) inventions, (b)
the discovery and development of new territory and new resources, and (c)
the growth of population. Each of these in turn, severally and in combination,
has opened investment outlets and caused a rapid growth of capital
formation.

The earlier economists were concerned chiefly with the effect of economic
progress upon the volume of output, or in other words, upon the level of
real income. For them economic progress affected the economic life mainly,
if not exclusively, in terms of rising productivity and higher real income per
capita.

Not until the very end of the nineteenth century did an extensive literature
arise which stressed the rôle of economic progress as a leading, if not the
main, factor causing fluctuations in employment, output, and income.
Ricardo had indeed seen that there was some relation between economic
progress and economic instability; but it was left for Wicksell, Spiethoff,
Schumpeter, Cassel, and Robertson to elaborate the thesis that economic
fluctuations are essentially a function of economic progress.
More recently the rôle of economic progress in the maintenance of full
employment of the productive resources has come under consideration. The
earlier economists assumed that the economic system tended automatically
to produce full employment of resources. Some unemployment there was
periodically, owing to the fluctuations incident to the business cycle; but in
the upswing phase of the cyclical movement the economy was believed to
function in a manner tending to bring about full recovery-maximum output
and employment. This view was inspired by a century in which the
forces of economic progress were powerful and strong, in which investment
outlets were numerous and alluring. Spiethoff saw clearly that technological