have passed. Labor has shared in the gains resulting from economic prog-
ress. Yet the tendency for wages, because of the nature of the demand for
labor, to approximate labor's contribution does not necessarily mean that
labor's interests are adequately protected.
This brings me to my first critical comment on the theorizing and still
more the conclusions relating to policy emanating from many of my clans-
men.
Permit me to observe that it is a curious fact, explained perhaps by undue
emphasis upon a narrow price economics, that economists generally have
been prone to discuss collective bargaining, the need for it, and what it
can and what it cannot accomplish, in terms of wages only. Wages are
only one detail in the labor contract and employment situation. Though
wages are certainly of first consideration in an age of scarcity, hours of
work, tenure, and general working conditions are vital to the working
man. Query: Do economic forces operate in such a way as to conserve these
other interests as they are supposed to do for wages?
The answer is a qualified No. The fact is, I believe, that a competitive
demand for labor does not go far in protecting the workers against long
hours, overtime, fines, discharge without sufficient cause, and objectionable
working conditions. This is explained in part by the fact that employers as
a rule are not actively interested in the long-run effects of hours and work-
ing conditions because of a lack of accurate knowledge of these effects and
because the labor contract is ordinarily terminable at will. In so far as hours
are concerned, there is fear that a reduction means reduced output or that
one reduction will develop interest in another. That it is exceedingly diffi-
cult to return to a longer day or week when a short one has been in use is
well known.
The explanation is found in part also in the fact that workers accept em-
ployment chiefly in view of rate of pay and possible earnings and of access-
ibility of the place of employment. Long hours, much overtime, discrimina-
tion, inconsiderate discipline, and bad working conditions may give rise to
a large turnover of labor due to many quitting; but such a turnover has not
generally led management to ascertain causes and to remedy them. Do we
not find twenty firms with neat turnover figures for one that seriously uses
them in an attempt to improve management?
Finally, the explanation is found in part in the fact that there is usually
keen competition in the market for the product as well as competition for
help. In order to extend business, to hold business, to meet the needs and
whims of customers with reference to style and delivery, to make favorable
prices and to maintain profits and dividends, these things are likely to be
**"taken out of labor." And if there is monopoly, the situation may be even
worse.
For these reasons I agree with Hutt who states that these important mat-**