only when the forces at work are few and their action thoroughly
understood, i.e., within a narrow range of the phenomena of the
external world. It is and always must be extremely uncertain in
the field of human action where the forces at work are indefinitely
numerous and but partially understood.

It is true that many economists as well as others underestimated
the reserve labor power which modern nations can call into action
and the extent to which they can readjust their economic machinery
when the spirit of self-sacrifice and patriotic enthusiasm has
been strongly awakened among their peoples, and that they therefore
predicted that financial and economic exhaustion would end
the war sooner than it did. But Europe was practically at the
end of its resources, financial and economic, when the war closed.
Fortunately the resources of our own country, when under these
conditions they were thrown into the scale, turned the balance
decisively and we were not called upon to undergo the test of endurance.


It is true that economists for the same reasons and because they
failed to make proper allowance for the temporary effects of inflation,
the influence of the newly established federal reserve system,
and the possibilities of organized appeals to patriotism, predicted
a rise in the rate of interest earlier than it actually occurred
in this country, but they were right in their analysis of the fundamental
influences at work. The rise has begun in the case of longtime
investments, although in the case of short-time loans it is still
retarded by the increase in our facilities for discount due to the
establishment of the federal reserve system, the great importation
of gold during the early years of the war, and the creation of some
25 billions of new securities in the form of public debt which have
been made available as collateral for loans at low rates of interest.
But even under these conditions the capacity of banks to loan is
not inexhaustible and there are indications that this fact is beginning
to be realized.

In 1914 I suppose practically all economists would have agreed
that a war such as we have been through accompanied by a great
expansion of money and credits and the destruction of wealth
would cause a rise in prices to be followed by a fall after the close
of the war. As a matter of fact, prices have continued to rise and
today, in the light of experience with new forces, brought into
operation by the war itself, many seem to doubt whether the fall
will come.

I venture to predict that here too, unless there is to