Their belief was a reflection of the Victorian confidence that certain ultimate
values in life had been grasped and cast into institutional molds that would
endure. Indeed, it was expected that with the diffusion of western culture
these institutions would spread, and that economic principles based on them
would apply with increasing validity to a world economic order.
These hopes have not been realized. The institutions of whose enduring
value men were so assured seventy-five years ago have been challenged, and
have lost ground. The course of development that seemed so clearly de-
lineated has been reversed. The world to which the principles of nineteenth-
century economics seemed so appropriate has found its borders steadily
restricted.
Today emotion, prejudice and narrow nationalism speak in the name of
economics in centers we used to respect. An oppressing sense of inadequacy
troubles us in the face of domestic emergencies. When we face these facts
it is inevitable that we should be concerned as to where we stand and
where we are going, as to the objectives, procedures, and prospects of our
discipline. Tonight, exercising the freedom that goes with this occasion,
I venture to indulge in some reflections on the present state of economics,
to discuss some of the reasons for current difficulties, and to touch on certain
of the responsibilities confronting us today.
I have suggested that we cannot today feel at home in an orderly world.
The reasons for this are not to be found in the immediate crisis alone. A
shift of attention, in economics, from systems and laws to facts and events
antedates this crisis. In some degree our present disquiet is a result of this
shift. There are times in every field of thought when system-building pre-
dominates. There have been periods in the social sciences when the working
out of general laws was the chief concern of students, when men were
content to sit on the heights of speculation with little regard to particulars,
when the processes of social life were of primary interest as manifestations
of moral principles or of a natural order of things. But intellectual climates
change. The aesthetic urge that leads men to seek unity in mental constructs
at the expense of conformity to reality ceases to dominate thought, and
curious minds turn again to the observation and understanding of phe-
nomena.
The causes of these swings, which are discernible in the history of eco-
nomics as in the history of other disciplines, are in some degree obscure.
Just why the pallid introspection of scholasticism gave place, in time, to the
fresh, eager interest in life of the Elizabethans, I do not know. Great op-
portunities and emergent needs growing out of urgent pressures doubtless
played a part.
Such opportunities and such needs, combined with a great advance in
the power and scope of observation, have helped to direct economists of
our generation to a more searching and more comprehensive scrutiny of