As candidates and recruiting committees depart from three intense days of interviews
at the ASSA meetings, the market becomes much less organized. Departments

invite some candidates they interviewed to day-long “flyouts” to their campuses, to present their job talks and meet the faculty. Essentially each department operates its own marketplace where candidates come to be evaluated and compared by the fac-ulty, and each candidate turns into a traveling salesperson, bringing his or her personal
marketplace on the road. This part of the market is congested. Flyouts absorb time and other resources, so there’s a limit to how many each department can host. This happens over several months, starting immediately after the ASSA meetings.
An important part of this congestion involves the timing of offers, acceptances,
and rejections. Large, highly ranked departments at wealthy universities can often schedule flyouts early and make multiple offers per position, and can thus make offers to all the candidates they wish to hire. Such offers are often effectively open-ended, allowing candidates time to see what other offers may be forthcoming. But smaller, less prosperous, and less highly ranked departments often put time limits on how long their offers will remain open. Even an offer open for two weeks (which is not too unusual), which gives the recipient some time to think and maybe to come for a second visit, may call for a decision before other offers come in, or even before other flyouts are accomplished. Congestion is one reason a department may wish to put time limits on its offers. If it expects to have to make multiple offers to fill a single position, but can only make one at a time, then making consecutive offers quickly gives it the opportunity, should the need arise, to make offers to multiple candidates before they have committed to other positions. A less beneficent reason to leave offers open for only a short time is to pressure candidates into committing before they have time to receive another offer they might prefer. For whatever reason they are made, these asynchronous offers and deadlines make the market effectively less thick, since many candidates are deprived of the opportunity to consider mul-tiple offers. Offers with short deadlines create a negative externality not just for applicants but also for other employers, since they shorten the time during which candidates remain available.
23

Although most economics departments do not make offers that candidates must
accept or reject before the ASSA meetings, some potential participants choose not to participate in the ASSA marketplace for interviews. Some employers of new economics PhDs—such as marketing departments in business schools—make offers before the ASSA meetings, and by the time of the meetings have already hired, or perhaps been turned down by economists who preferred to try their