Intelligent design in macroeconomics solves government programming problems (item b below)
with models/that impute common beliefs and best responses to all of the agents who inhabit
the model. The common beliefs assumption makes parameters describing agents' beliefs about
endogenous variables disappear from p.
The common beliefs assumption underlies a long list of useful results in modern macroeco?
nomics. The following four have especially influenced thinking within central banks.
a) Expected versus unexpected government actions. Lucas (1972b) drew a sharp distinction
between the effects of foreseen and unforeseen monetary and fiscal policy actions when the
government and the public share a probability model. That idea defines the terms in which
central bankers now think about shocks and systematic policies.
b) Optimal fiscal and monetary policy cast as Ramsey and mechanism design problems. A
literature summarized and extended by Robert G. King and Alexander L. Wolman (1996),
Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999), and Michael D. Woodford (2003)
uses dynamic macroeconomic models with sticky prices to design monetary policy rules
by finding practical ways to represent and implement solutions of Ramsey plans like equa?
tion (2). New dynamic models of public finance refine Ramsey plans by focusing on a
trade-off between efficiency and incentives that emerges from the assumption that each
individual privately observes his own skills and effort, a feature that imposes constraints
on the allocations that a planner can implement relative to ones he could achieve if he had  more information.2
c) Time inconsistency. The availability of the rational expectations equilibrium concept enabled
Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott (1977) and Guillermo A. Calvo (1978) to explain
how alternative timing protocols affect a benevolent government's capacity to manipulate
and its incentives to confirm prior expectations about its actions.3 The time inconsistency
"problem" is the observation that equilibrium outcomes in a representative-agent economy
depend on the timing protocol for decision making that nature or the modeler imposes. Better
outcomes emerge if a government chooses a history-contingent plan once and for all at time 0
than if it were allowed to choose sequentially. By choosing future actions at time 0, the gov?
ernment can take into account how expectations about its actions at times t > 0 influence pri?
vate agents' actions at all dates between 0 and t. A government must ignore those beneficial
expectations effects if it is forced to choose sequentially.
d) Reputation can substitute for commitment. Under rational expectations, a government
strategy plays two roles, first, as a decision rule, and, second, as a system of private sector