VIII. Narratives During the Sharpest (Though Not the Worst) US Contraction Ever,
1920 to 1921
In looking for the narrative basis of economic recessions, which might be hard
to see since narratives are not easy to measure, it would appear that we would have
the most luck looking at really big ones: 1920-1921 was the sharpest US recession
since modern statistics are available. The US Consumer Price Index switched
suddenly from inflation to deflation: between June 1920 and June 1921, during the
Depression, it fell 16 percent, the sharpest one-year deflation ever experienced in the
United States. The Index of Wholesale Prices fell much more: 45 percent over the
same time interval, its sharpest decline ever.13 The cyclically adjusted price earnings
ratio (real S&P Composite Index divided by ten-year average of real earnings,
Campbell and Shiller 1988) fell to 4.78 by December 1920, by far the lowest ratio in
the entire history of the US stock market since 1871. In contrast, note that the ratio
is currently around 28. The conventional price-earnings ratio with 12-month trailing
earnings was also extremely low, at 8.51. This was the recession that, because of its
severity, influenced the fledgling National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
toward a research program emphasizing the study and dating of business cycles.
Surprisingly, the online NBER Working Paper Series, almost a hundred years
later, when searched, has virtually nothing to say about what caused this spectacular
depression. Why, after all, did it happenMilton
Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, in their Monetary History of the United
States , have given the most influential account. According to them, the 1920-1921
contraction has a single identifiable cause: an error made by the fledgling Federal
Reserve to raise the discount rate to trim out-of-bounds inflation in 1919 caused
by their carelessly over-expansionary policy right after World War I, leading to a
necessity to take strong measures against inflation in 1920. Benjamin Strong, the
president of the New York Fed, was on a long cruise starting December 1919, and
was unable to prevent Federal Reserve Banks (which did not coordinate their policies
with each other so much back then) from raising the discount rate as much as a
full percentage point in one shot in January 1920.
The Fed was new then, having opened its doors only in 1914, and so it is not surprising
that they could have made mistakes and implemented overly strong swings
in policy. But let us not jump to conclusions about the Fed having caused the depression.
Other remarkable things were going on too. If we are going to single out significant
events for study, we should keep in mind that important events are usually the
result of the confluence of many factors, and often changing narratives are at work
in those factors.
There was a background then of horrible recent events: World War I, which ended
only 14 months before the start of the Depression; an influenza epidemic even more
deadly than the war that started during the war and was not quite over; and a series
of postwar race riots in the United States. But how did these events translate into
current narrati