for objects and pleasures out of all proportion to the value received. If it
cost a great deal of money, we promptly came to the conclusion that they
must be good. . . Take the matter of home entertainment. Many of us had
almost forgotten how much fun it can be to gather friends around one's
own table. Any number of us suffered from "restaurant digestion."20
Catherine Hackett, another writer in 1932, explained her view of the new morality
in the Great Depression:
In the old Boom era I could buy a jar of bath salts or an extra pair of
evening slippers without an uncomfortable consciousness of the poor
who lacked the necessities of life. I could always reflect happily on the
much-publicized day laborers who wore silk shirts and rode to their work
in Fords. Now it was different. The Joneses were considered to be callous
to human misery if they continued to give big parties and wear fine
clothes.21
Another narrative at the beginning of the Great Depression was that of a repeat
of the 1920-1921 event - no more distant in their memories than the events of
2007-2009 are to our memories today. Since many must have expected prices to
fall, as they did before during 1920-1921, they would want to delay their purchases
until the price decline was complete. Economists naturally expected the contraction
to be as short lived as in 1920-1921, which helps explain why President Hoover
and others confidently explained that it would be over soon. But the public didn't
necessarily believe President Hoover. Catherine Hackett wrote
I have read enough predictions by economists to convince me that my
guess is as good as anyone 's on the future trend of prices. A housewife
plays the falling commodity market just as an investor plays the falling
stock market ; she sits tight and waits for prices to settle before buying
anything but actual necessities. But I do not need to be an economist to
realize that if all the twenty million housewives do that , business recovery
will be indefinitely delayed.22
I have displayed this quote here as originally worded in 1932 because it illustrates
some aspects of consumer behavior then that may not be remembered and
appreciated. She finds similarity in consumer behavior to the behavior of stock
market speculators, who put their own emotional energy into forming their own
personal forecast for the individual stock prices, not trusting experts, as well as the
high contagion of narratives about such speculation. Women must have been talking
like speculators, telling stories about some smart decisions and some mistakes with
their shopping successes and failures. This must often have been about the second
moment of consumer price changes. Even if average expectations for inflation were
nonnegative, it is plausible if there was a higher contagion rate for emotionally laden
narratives about the price decline scenario, there could be significant net decrement
to consumer spend