of the nominal neutral rate from 2 percent or so primarily reflect shortfalls of infla-
tion expectations. In other words, the current constraints on monetary policy in sev-
eral regions, notably the euro area and Japan, arguably arise in substantial part from
the fact that, for various reasons, inflation expectations in those regions have fallen
too low. The challenge for those central banks, perhaps in collaboration with the
fiscal authorities, is to move inflation expectations closer to target. If that can be
achieved, then monetary policy, augmented by the new policy tools, could regain
much of its potency.
III. Conclusions
This lecture has reviewed the experience with, and the future potential of, the
new monetary tools, especially quantitative easing and forward guidance. Although
there are dissenting views, most research finds that QE has significant and persistent
effects on financial conditions, even when financial markets are not dysfunctional.
Forward guidance can help inform financial markets about policymakers’ likely
responses to economic developments and allow them to commit to future policy
actions, including  lower-for-longer rate policies, that create greater stimulus today.
Major central banks actively used both QE and forward guidance following the
financial crisis. Although these tools helped cushion the economic effects of the cri-
sis, their application was hindered at times, with the benefit of hindsight, by exces-
sive concern about the costs and risks of the new tools and by policymakers’ need
to learn how better to structure and to implement these policies, and how to commu-
nicate about them. Better execution of the new policy tools, together with increased
public understanding and acceptance, should make these tools more effective in
the future. For example, policy frameworks that lay out in advance the nature of
the forward guidance policymakers expect to use at the lower bound will make that
guidance clearer, more credible, and more effective when it is needed. New tools
other than QE and forward guidance, such as  funding-for-lending programs, neg-
ative policy rates, and yield curve control, could in some circumstances be useful
as well. In particular, the Federal Reserve should maintain constructive ambiguity
about negative policy rates and consider yield curve control at shorter horizons as
a means of reinforcing forward guidance. However, although the new tools can be
used with the knowledge that their costs and risks have generally proved moderate,
vigilance against risks to financial stability remains essential.
How much policy space can the new monetary tools provide? The answer depends
on the level of the nominal neutral interest rate, the interest rate consistent with full
employment and inflation at target in the long run. If that rate is in the range of 2 to
3 percent or higher, consistent with most estimates for the United States, then simu-
lations of the Fed’s FRB/ US model suggest that a combination of QE and forward
guidance can largely compensate for the effects of the lower bound, providing about
3 percentage points of additional policy space. In these circumstances, the use of new
policy tools seems clearly preferable to raising the inflation target, a measure that may
increase policy space by a comparable amount but that carries with it the additional
costs of the transition to the higher target and of the higher  long-run inflation rate.
However, if the nominal neutral interest rate is much lower than 2 percent, then
the model simulations imply that the new monetary tools—while s