fixed "calorie needs" are met, and thus to an apparent increase in poverty, exactly contrary to
the true state of affairs; see Deaton and Jean Dr?ze (2009) for a discussion of the Indian case,
and Government of India (2009), which has recently explicitly repudiated the calorie basis for
its poverty lines. At the same time, small changes in lines can have large effects on the counts
when there is a large fraction of the population near the line; more generally, it is hard to justify
treating people so differently, whether or not they happen to fall on one or the other side of a
largely arbitrary line.

Poverty counts can also be very sensitive to survey design. Given a global line, the contribu
tion of a country to the world count is the number of people whose household per capita expen
diture lies below the local value of the line, a number that is estimated from household surveys.
Yet some surveys collect data on income, not on consumption; most countries do not have regular
annual surveys; and in many cases, surveys change over time in ways that make the counts non
comparable, for example by being collected in different parts of the year, collecting different lists
of goods, or covering different selections of the population. There are long-standing questions
about the ability of household surveys to capture consumption or income, even to the extent of
showing an increase in poverty when the opposite is true (N. S. Jodha 1988). Survey means are
often inconsistent with comparable means from the national accounts, and although there are
certainly errors in both, there is widespread skepticism about the accuracy of the survey distribu
tions, with growing concerns in some countries about item and respondent nonresponse. Another
example comes from the Indian National Sample Survey which, in the late 1990s, experimented
with a seven-day recall period for food and some other items in place of the 30-day period that
had long been their standard. This change resulted in a sharp increase in the reported monthly
flow of expenditure, enough to remove more than 175 million Indians from the national poverty
count; the effect would have been larger still if the poverty line had been mechanically reset
using the standard nutritional approach (Deaton 2001, 139-41). Yet recall periods are far from
standard across countries, so that we should regard global poverty estimates as very rough and
not be surprised by classification errors involving hundreds of millions of people.
The survey based counts cannot satisfy another demand, which is for annual monitoring of
world poverty. The World Bank updates its global poverty counts by scaling up the latest survey
distributions by growth factors taken from the NAS, but the inconsistencies between survey and
NAS growth rates in many countries mean that such estimates are potentially subject to substan
tial revisions when the new survey data are collected, and it is unclear whether such estimates
provide any new information beyond the consumption and income data in the NAS, which are
themselves of uneven quality and timeliness. Yet international organizations and NGOs regularly
make claims about the effects on world poverty and on world hunger of current events?most
recently the rise in food prices and the financial crisis; these claims are essentially extrapolations
using evidence whose pertinence can reasonably be questioned.

Given all of the problems, it is worth returning to the idea that people themselves seem to have
a very good idea of whether or not they are poor. Indeed, the poverty lines set by politicians and
bureaucrats are often informed by community ideas of what is needed to get by, even if they are
often subsequently justified by more "scientific" supports. There is also a long and distinguished
tradition, based on the work of Bernard van Praag (1968), of turning self-reports about income
adequacy into poverty lines; see Theo Goedhart, Victor Halberstadt, Arie Kapteyn, and van
Praag (1997), who developed the procedure, which has been used among others by Klaas de Vos
and Thesia Garner (1991) to compare the United States and Holland, and extended by Menno
Pradhan and Ravallion (2000) to compare Jamaica and Nepal. So there is something to be said
for directly asking people around the world how their lives are going, whether they have enough,
or whether they are in financial difficulty, and in cases where there are reliable income data,
turning those reports into poverty lines. There are two immediate concerns with such measures