lower bound, monetary policy has never proved able to reverse large shocks, only
to mitigate them and speed recovery. Moreover, the  post-crisis period featured some
unusual headwinds, including—in the United States—the  after-effects of the financial
crisis and the housing bust and a transition from fiscal expansion to austerity.
And the recovery, though not rapid, was unusually sustained, in 2019 becoming the
longest documented expansion in US history. Did the limits imposed by the lower
bound make the Great Recession significantly worse, or the recovery slower? How
much did the new tools help?
The literature does not provide a consensus on these questions. Some work suggests
that the new tools substantially overcame the limitations imposed by the lower bound.
For example, Fernald et al. ( 2017) , using growth accounting methods, attributed the
slow pace of the US recovery from the Great Recession primarily to subdued productivity
growth and  demographically-induced declines in labor force participation,
both trends in place before the financial crisis. They noted that indicators of resource
utilization like the unemployment rate—which are more subject to the influence of
monetary policy than is potential growth—behaved relatively normally during the
recovery.18 If the recovery from the Great Recession was relatively normal, given the
size of the shock and the economy’s underlying growth potential, then presumably the
lower bound could not have been a major constraint on policy.
An interesting alternative approach to measuring the effectiveness of  post-crisis
monetary policy is through the construction of “shadow”  short-term interest rates.
Following an insight of Black (1995), Wu and Xia (2016) used an affine term structure
model to make inferences from the full yield curve about what the  short-term
interest rate would have been had it not been constrained by the lower bound. During
normal times, the  so-called shadow rate they estimated generally equals the actual
policy rate, while during  lower-bound periods the shadow rate is usually negative.
Wu and Xia interpreted the shadow rate as a summary measure of the stance of
monetary policy, including nontraditional measures, finding that its relationships
with asset prices and macro variables look much like those of the actual federal
funds rate before the crisis. Based on this measure, these authors found that the
new tools provided only limited stimulus early in the recovery, but that, ultimately,
these tools provided about 3 percentage points of additional accommodation (that
is, the shadow rate fell, by 2015, to about −3 percent). They estimated that this
easing resulted in a slightly greater reduction in the unemployment rate than in a
counterfactual with traditional policies and no lower bound. Krippner (2015) provided
an alternative shadow rate series, which he argued is more robust to alternative
estimation assumptions and sample periods. His measure also implies that the new
policy tools delivered significant stimulus—the equivalent of setting the  short-run
policy rate more than 5 percentage points below zero by 2013—but, like Wu and
Xia (2016), Krippner found that monetary stimulus was more limited in the earliest
stages of the r