I focus throughout this lecture on monetary tools aimed at achieving employment
and inflation objectives, excluding policies aimed primarily at stabilizing dysfunctional
financial markets, such as the Federal Reserve’s emergency credit facilities
and currency swaps and the European Central Bank’s (ECB) Securities Markets
Program, under which the ECB made targeted purchases to help restore confidence
in sovereign debt markets.5 The stabilization of financial markets improves economic
outcomes, of course, but  lender-of-last-resort programs are not useful outside
of a crisis and thus should not be viewed as part of normal monetary policy.
A. Central Bank Asset Purchases (QE)

The Fed announced its first program of  large-scale asset purchases in November
2008, when it made public its plans to buy  mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and
debt issued by the  government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac. In March 2009, in an action that would become known as QE1, the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) authorized both increased purchases of
MBS and, for the first time,  large-scale purchases of US Treasury securities. Asset
purchases under QE1 totaled about $1.725 trillion (Bhattarai and Neely 2016).
Three other major programs would follow: (i) QE2, announced in November 2010,
in which the Fed committed to $600 billion in additional Treasuries purchases; (ii)
the Maturity Extension Program, announced in September 2011 and extended in
June 2012, under which the Fed lengthened the average maturity of its portfolio
by selling off  short-term Treasuries and buying  longer-term government debt; and
(iii) QE3, announced in September 2012, an  open-ended program that committed
the Fed to buying both Treasury securities and MBS until the outlook for the labor
market had improved “substantially.” In 2013, hints that asset purchases might begin
to slow led to a “taper tantrum” in bond markets, with the  10-year yield rising by
nearly one percentage point over several months. The Fed’s purchases did not end
however until October 2014. Total net asset purchases by that point were about $3.8
trillion, approximately 22 percent of 2014 GDP. Most purchases were of  longer-term
securities; between 2007 and late 2014 the average duration of the Fed’s portfolio
increased from 1.6 years to 6.9 years (Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider 2015).
The Fed was by no means the only central bank to employ asset purchases as

a monetary policy tool. The first to confront the lower bound, the Bank of Japan,
adopted an asset purchase program in March 2001, but its focus was increasing
the monetary base rather than reducing  longer-term rates by buying  longer-term
assets. The BOJ began aggressive purchases of  longer-term securities in 2013 with
the advent of “Abenomics,” the set of policies advocated by Prime Minister Shinzo
Abe. The Bank of England adopted QE more or less in parallel with the Federal
Reserve, announcing its first major program in March 2009, a few days ahead of
the Fed’s QE1 announcement. The BOE then periodically increased targets
