in consequence, increased as the rents from ownership decreased and because men
were disproportionately the owners.

The second change involves decreased costs to flexible employment in pharmacy.
Pharmacists have become better substitutes for each other with the increased standardization
of procedures and drugs. The extensive use of computer systems that

track clients across pharmacies, insurance companies, and physicians mean that any
licensed pharmacist knows a client's needs as well as any other. If a pharmacist is
assisting a customer and takes a break, another can seamlessly step in. In consequence,
there is little change in productivity for short-hour workers and for those
with labor force breaks. Other factors mentioned in the 0*Net section are also of
importance. For example, there is less need for interdependent teams in pharmacy
and for extensive contact with other employees.45

Female pharmacists have fairly high labor force participation rates and only a
small fraction have substantial interruptions from employment. Rather than taking
off time, female pharmacists with children go on part-time schedules. In fact, more
than 40 percent of female pharmacists with children work part-time from the time
they are in their early thirties to about 50 years old. Male pharmacists work around
45 hours a week, about nine hours more than the average female pharmacist.

The position of pharmacist became among the most egalitarian of all professions
today. The facts in Goldin and Katz (2013) are consistent with the labor market
effects of changes in technology and in the structure of the industry. They are less
consistent with change stemming from an increase in the demand for family-friendly
workplace amenities. In addition, the changes do not appear to have resulted from
legislation or anti-discrimination policy or licensing requirements or regulations
specific to the pharmacy profession. Rather, a host of structural changes outside the
realm of the labor market (e.g., increased economies of scale in pharmacies, standardization
of drugs, computer use, linked records through insurers) increased the

demand for pharmacists and reorganized work in ways that have made pharmacy a
more family-friendly and female-welcoming profession.

VI. What the Last Chapter Must Contain

The reasoning of this essay is as follows. A gender gap in earnings exists today
that greatly expands with age, to some point, and differs significantly by occupation.
The gap is much lower than it had once been and the decline has been largely due to
an increase in the productive human capital of women relative to men. Education at
all levels increased for women relative to men and the fields that women pursue in
college and beyond shifted to the more remunerative and career-oriented ones. Job
experience of women also expanded with increased labor force participation. The
portion of the difference in earnings by gender that was once due to differences in
productive characteristics has largely been eliminated.

What, then, is the cause of the remaining pay gap? Quite simply the gap exists
because hours of work in many occupations are worth more when given at particular
moments and when the hours are more continuous. That is, in many occup
