consumption. However, World Bank (2008b, pp. 23-5) lists old and new PPPs for household
final consumption expenditure in 2005 for 118 countries, and I have used these to calculate the
Concept 2 measure of the Gini coefficient for consumption. Here, too, the revision from old to
new PPPs led to a substantial increase in measured inequality, with the per capita consumption
Gini rising from 0.48 to 0.56.

For my analysis here, it is the widening of measured inequality that is the key effect of the
2005 revision of the ICR On average, rich nations and poor nations moved further apart. Judged
from the rich world, the poor world is poorer than we thought, but judged from the poor world,
the rich world is richer than we thought; the two statements are equivalent, and the difference
depends on nothing more than the choice of numeraire. As we shall see, the revision to the ICP,
in and of itself, had little effect on the world poverty count.

II. The Construction of International Purchasing Power Parity Exchange Rates
In order to understand why the ICP might have an effect on our perceptions of global pov
erty and inequality, we need to understand something about how it works. This section pro
vides a brief account of relevant issues based on Deaton and Alan Heston (2010); comprehensive
accounts of the 2005 round are contained in World Bank (2008a), and in the handbooks on the  ICP Web site at the World Bank.
The latest round of the ICP constructed purchasing power parity price indexes for 146 par
ticipating countries for 2005. I focus for the moment on the indexes for household consumption
that enter into the global poverty calculations. Consumption is divided into 110 "basic headings,"
such as rice, bread, clothing, furniture and furnishings, and each basic heading is represented
by a list of precisely specified items that lie within it. It is these items that are actually priced by
the ICP investigators. The basic headings are the same for all countries, but the detailed lists are
different for different regions of the world, of which there were six in 2005; this structure means
that the same items are not priced in all 146 countries. For example, fresh mud crabs and fresh
squid appear in the Asian list in the fish basic heading, while in Africa, we have Nile perch, cat
fish, kapenta, and bonga, along with many other fishes. At a first stage, the prices for the detailed
lists are aggregated up to give regional "parities" (price indexes or PPPs) for each basic heading.
These are in the units of a regional numeraire, e.g., Hong Kong for the Asia/Pacific region, and
are the price indexes, with Hong Kong as unity, for each basic heading in each country in Asia/
Pacific. For example, fish in Bangladesh is 4.90 taka per Hong Kong dollar, and 4.64 Sri Lankan
rupees per Hong Kong dollar in Sri Lanka, while the corresponding figures for gasoline are 2.55
and 3.17. These parities are commodity-specific PPP exchange rates, and there is one for each
basic heading in consumption. At a second stage, these parities for basic headings are averaged
to give an overall PPP for the country. An important distinction between the first and second
stage is that at the latter, the averaging can use expenditures from the NAS to weight together the
parities from each basic heading in relation to the amount spent on each. At the first stage, within
the basic headings, there are no NAS expenditure data, and aggregation up to the parities for the
basic headings must be done without weights.

The procedures outlined above yield a system of PPP exchange rates for each region of the
world, with a different numeraire country in each region, not a single global system with a single
numeraire currency such as the US dollar. In the 2005 ICP, the "gluing together" of the regions
was accomplished using a third stage, the "ring," in which 18 strategically chosen countries, at
least two per region, were asked to price a new, common detailed list of more than 1,100 items.
Those prices were then used to link the regions.

Beyond this general outline, I now develop some of the details that I shall need to under
stand the implications for the measurement of poverty and inequality. At the first, detailed stage,