the ICP collects prices in each country c in region r for basic head /* so that there might be
j = 1, ...Nr items in the basic heading (varieties of fish in the fish basic heading). We can then
run a set of country-product dummy (CPD) regressions, one for each basic heading separately
by region, of the form
(1) \nPiy = ar + +
in which each price is regressed on a set of commodity (basic heading) and country dummieswith
 country 1 omitted?so that the parity in region r for basic heading / (with country 1 as
numeraire) is given by
(2) pf = exp?r)
where the suffix lr identifies the numeraire country in region r. If every country in the region
prices everything in the regional list, (2) would be a geometric mean of prices in the basic head
ing for country c. But not everyone has fresh (or even smoked) bonga in their local market, so
that CPD regression works when geometric means would not. Effectively, (1) "fills in" missing
values for items whose prices cannot be found, even to the extent of delivering a comparison of
two countries neither of which consumed any item purchased in the other, provided that the items
appear together in one or more other countries.
Another problematic issue here is that smoked bonga (or indeed Kellogg's cornflakes, a more
important example) may be available but is rarely eaten in country c, so that it is only stocked
in specialty shops at very high prices. On the one hand, the ICP wants to specify goods very
precisely (the actual specification in the African list is "smoked bonga, in simple wrapping, open
product presentation, a piece of approximately 200 grams") so that we are sure we are match
ing like with like (and not matching a bonga with just any smoked fish), while, on the other, it
wants to avoid comparing commonly consumed items with nonrepresentative, rarely consumed,
and expensive ones. To try to handle this tension, the ICP asked enumerators to grade the local
representativity of each good on a three point scale, with the intent of down-weighting unrepre
sentative items. A similar system was successfully operated in Europe in 2005, but the rankings
from the other regions were not usable, so no correction was made for high prices of possibly
unrepresentative goods.
When we move from parities for basic headings to PPPs for countries, the prices for each basic
heading from (3) are combined with expenditures from the national accounts statistics of each
country. In the first instance, this is done for each region separately. The theory here is a multi
lateral extension of standard bilateral price index formulas in which Fisher ideal indexes for each
pair of countries are adjusted so as to give a transitive set of international prices indexes, or PPPs;
see Deaton and Heston (2010) for an account. The Fisher indexes underlying the multilateral
PPPs are "superlative" indexes, Erwin Diewert (1976), which means that there exists a suitably
general set of preferences for which they are exact cost-of-living index numbers. Because the
index uses weights from both countries, rather than just one or the other, the use of the Fisher
index limits the effects that would result from weighting one country's prices by expenditure
patterns that come from a country or countries with very different relative prices and consump
tion patterns; if countries had identical tastes, these effects would be the familiar substitution or  Gershenkron biases.
The third and final stage of the ICP brings the regions together into a single set of basic head
ing and country parities for the world as a whole with everything expressed in the currency of a
single numeraire country, the United States. This is done by pricing a new common "ring" list of
more than 1,100 items in each of 18 countries, Brazil, Chile, Cameroon, Egypt, Estonia, United