971
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
with new QE programs assumed to add to assets already on the balance sheet from 
any prior programs. Thus, it is possible to observe the  long-run distribution of bal-
ance sheet sizes associated with any particular strategy.
Following Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Reifschneider (2016); and 
Kiley (2018), and consistent with the empirical evidence (e.g., Ihrig et al. 2018), I 
assume that $500 billion in asset purchases by the Fed lowers the  10-year Treasury 
yield by 20 basis points, and the  5-year and  30-year yields by 17 and 7 basis points, 
respectively.21 Assuming smaller effects of QE on rates would increase the scale of 
asset purchases required to achieve any particular economic outcome in my sim-
ulations but otherwise not affect the results. I assume that the effects of QE on 
 longer-term rates are linear, exhibiting neither increasing nor decreasing returns. 
Since the ability of QE to depress term premiums may be limited in practice, I also 
ran simulations (not reported) in which term premiums are constrained from falling 
more than 120 basis points below their  steady-state,  no-QE level, consistent with the 
maximum effect found by Ihrig et al. (2018) for the Great Recession period. This 
additional assumption led to no material change in the results.
Combination Policies.—Finally, I consider policies that combine forward 
guidance, with an inflation threshold of 2 percent, with QE programs of varying 
aggressiveness.
For each policy rule to be evaluated, I ran 500 simulations of FRB/US, drawing 
model residuals from the  1970–2015 period. Each simulation is 200 periods (quar -
ters). Results are reported for the second 100 quarters of each simulation, with the 
first 100 quarters used to set initial conditions. Except for the  28-quarter limit on 
the credibility of forward guidance, I assume  model-consistent expectations, that is, 
the agents in the model are assumed to understand the dynamics of the economy, 
including the form of the policy rule. Since the comparisons here are between steady 
states,  model-consistent expectations seems the right assumption. An alternative 
assumption is that only participants in financial markets know the model and the 
policy rule; see Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) for a discussion. Simulations 
using this alternative expectational assumption do not change the broad conclu-
sions of the study; under the alternative assumption, forward guidance becomes 
somewhat less effective (not surprisingly), but QE becomes slightly more effective. 
The solution method imposes a lower bound of zero on the current  short-term inter -
est rate and on expected future  short-term rates.  Longer-term interest rates are not 
prevented from going negative, reflecting negative term premiums; see below for 
further discussion.
Results are shown for the case   r   ∗   = 1 in Table 3, and   r   ∗   = 0 in Table 4. The cor -
responding nominal neutral interest rates,   i   ∗  , are in each case assumed to be the sum 
of the assumed real neutral rate,   r   ∗  , and the inflation target,   π   ∗  . In particular, the 
nominal neutral rate is 3 percent in Table 3 and 2 percent in Table 4, except for the 
two policy rules in each table that assume an inflation target higher than 2 percent.
21 The $500 billion is roughly in 2014 dollars—roughly, because it draws from several empirical sources. 
Alternatively, the QE effects could have been calibrated to asset purchases relative to GDP or to the outstanding 
stock of Treasury securities.