Consider, for example, the markets for two of the most competitive kinds of positions
for new lawyers: clerkships for appellate judges (Avery et al. 2001, 2007),38
and associate positions in the largest law partnerships (Roth and Xing 1994 and
Roth 2012). If someone graduating from law school this year moves into one of those positions, it is very likely that the job was arranged two years in advance (formally in the case of a clerkship, somewhat informally in case of an associate position, with the formal contract being made only one year in advance).
For clerkships, the Judicial Conference of the United States has tried to change
this situation, often with temporary and partial success, at least six times since 1983. In each case they have specified a date before which judges should not make offers of clerkships. The most recent and long-lasting of these attempts began in 2002 and was officially abandoned only in 2014, although by that time it was widely under -
stood that most judges were no longer following the rules.
39
The 2002 attempt at rule-making initially specified only that offers should not
be made “earlier than the Fall of the third year of law school.” But by 2003, three precise dates (starting after Labor Day of students’ third year) were specified before which no applicant may submit nor judges receive applications and letters of ref-erence; before which interviews may not be scheduled; and before which judges may not conduct interviews and (simultaneously) extend offers. This led to a very compressed market following the time of the first allowable interviews, which often ended with exploding offers. For example, Avery et al. (2007, p.

448) quote a 2005
clerkship applicant:
I received the offer via voice mail while I was in flight to my second
interview. The judge actually left three messages. First, to make the offer. Second, to tell me that I should respond soon. Third, to rescind the offer. It was a 35-minute flight.
This compression around first interviews made some judges try to “jump the gun,”
by scheduling interviews, and making offers, before the allowed time. Avery et al.
(2007)  report that by 2005 over one-half of the judges who responded to a survey
were aware that a substantial number of judges did not adhere to the indicated dates. Nevertheless, the plan was restated each year before being officially abandoned in 2014.
During that time, a growing number of judges violated the dates by moving
sometimes only a little earlier than in previous years. Moving just a little early allows a judge to free ride on the public good provided by a thick market operat-ing in students’ third year of law school. By waiting to hire clerks until their last year of law school, judges can collect more reliable information on each student’s likely abilities.
40 But by moving just a little early, judges can seek to benefit fr