Learning to Supplement a Commodity Currency with Tokens.?Angela Redish (1990, 2000)
and Sargent and Fran?ois Velde (2002) described how it took 800 years to understand and cope
with two imperfections that marred an ideal self-regulating commodity money system in which
coins of all denominations were meant to exchange at values proportional to their silver (or gold)
content. In the ideal system, a government instructed a mint to offer to sell coins of different
denominations for precious metal at prices proportional to their weights in precious metal. The
mint did not buy coins for metal, but citizens were free to meit precious metal coins to recover
precious metal. If minting and melting were costless, this self-regulating system would automatically
 adjust the denomination structure of coins to suit coin holders' preferences by letting them
meit coins of a denomination they wanted less of, then take the metal to the mint to buy coins
of the denomination they wanted.47 In the ideal system, a metal meit point equaled a metal mint
point, denomination by denomination.
In practice, two imperfections hampered this system: (1) it was costly to produce coins; and (2)
coins depreciated through wear and tear and sweating and clipping. The first imperfection gave
rise to nonempty intervals between meit and mint points for gold or silver coins of each denomination?
an upper point that indicated a melting point for that coin and a lower one that prompted
minting. The proportionate spreads between minting and melting points differed because as a
fraction of the value of the coin, it was cheaper to produce a large denomination coin than a small
denomination coin. Unless the government were to subsidize the mint for producing low denomination
 coins, the spread between minting and melting points would be proportionately wider for
low denomination coins. The second imperfection allowed underweight coins to circulate along
side full weight coins.
A nonempty interval between melting and minting points allowed coins to circulate by tale
(i.e., by what is written on the coin rather than by weight) at an exchange value that exceeded
their value by weight. Indeed, in the presence of costs of producing coins, the money supply
mechanism provided incentives for people to purchase new coins from the mint only when their
value in exchange exceeded their value by weight by enough to cover the mint's brassage and
seigniorage fees (Adam Smith 1789, book I, ch. 5).
Nonempty intervals with proportionately wider widths for lower denomination coins and a
consequent exchange rate indeterminacy allowed the intervals to shift over time and eventually
to become so misaligned that they recurrently provided incentives to meit small denomination
coins. That created the recurring shortages of small coins documented by Carlo Cipolla (1956,
1982).48
Cipolla (1956) described a temporary practical remedy for these shortages. The authorities
debased small denomination coins, thereby shifting their mint-melt intervals in a direction that
motivated citizens to purchase new coins from the mint. Monetary authorities throughout Europe
used this method for hundreds of years. There were repeated debasements in small denomination
silver coins and secular declines in rates of exchange of small denomination for large denomination
 coins.
Many experiments, some inadvertent, others purposeful, were performed, and numerous theoretical
 tracts were written and disputed before what Cipolla (1956) called the "standard formula"
for issuing token small denomination coins was put into practice in the mid-nineteenth century.49