949
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
found the total decline in the  10-year Treasury yield associated with QE2 was a 
relatively moderate 18 basis points, well less than the QE1 effect even with some 
adjustment for the different sizes of the two programs. Analogous results have been 
found in event studies of other  later-round QE programs, in both the United States 
and in other countries. A possible interpretation is that the initial rounds of QE were 
particularly effective because they were introduced, and provided critical liquidity, 
in a period of exceptional dysfunction in financial markets. However, if QE only 
works in such extraordinary circumstances, it is of limited use for monetary policy-
makers during calmer times.
The second point raised by critics is that event studies, by their nature, capture 
asset market reactions over only a short period. It may be that these studies reveal 
only  short-term liquidity effects, analogous (although much larger) to the  within-day 
price effects of an unexpectedly large purchase or sale of a stock. Such effects would 
be expected to dissipate quickly and would not provide much monetary accom-
modation, since private spending decisions presumably respond only to persistent 
changes in financial conditions. A variant of this objection, which takes a slightly 
 longer-term perspective, begins by pointing out that  longer-term Treasury yields did 
not consistently decline during periods in which asset purchases were being carried 
out. For example, the  10-year yield at the termination of QE1 purchases was actually 
higher than it was before QE1 was announced. Perhaps investors came to appreciate 
over time that  asset-purchase programs would not be effective? Using time series 
methods, Wright (2011) argues that the effects of  post-crisis policy announcements 
died off fairly quickly.
Additional Evidence on the Effects of QE.—These two critiques of the  event-study 
evidence raise important issues. However, other evidence on the effects of QE pro-
vides counterpoints. I take each of the critiques in turn.
First, although the weaker effects on asset prices found in event studies of later 
rounds of QE could be the result of the calmer market conditions, those findings 
could also reflect that later rounds of QE were better anticipated by investors, who 
by then had been educated about the tool and the willingness of central banks to use 
it. If later QE rounds were largely anticipated, then their effects would have been 
incorporated into asset prices in advance of formal announcements, accounting for 
the  event-study results (Gagnon 2018).
Surveys of market participants and media reports suggest that later rounds of QE 
in the United States and elsewhere were in fact widely anticipated. For example, 
according to the New York Fed’s survey of primary dealers, prior to the announce-
ment of QE2 in November 2010, dealers placed an 88 percent probability that the 
Fed would undertake another round of asset purchases. The primary dealers also 
expected the program to be significantly larger and more extended than what was 
subsequently announced (Cahill et al. 2013, Appendix A). It’s not surprising then 
that the market reaction on the date of the QE2 announcement was small; in fact, 
 10-year Treasury yields rose slightly on the day, presumably reflecting investor dis-
appointment about the program’s scale.
For  event-study researchers, a possible way to address this problem is to include 
more event days, to capture more announcements, data releases, and other events 
bearing on the probability of new asset purchases (Greenlaw et al. 2018). However, 