of income and emissions. To attain higher reduction rates (such as zero emissions)
would require improvements in technology so that it becomes economical to attain
these higher reduction rates at lower costs.
E. Economic Gains from the Climate Club
What are the economic gains from the Climate Club? The Club is designed to
increase economic welfare by overcoming free-riding. Figure 5 shows the net economic
gains for different regimes, while Figure 6 shows the regime efficiency as
measured by the percentage of the cooperative gains that are realized.
First examining Figure 5, it is clear that the gains to cooperation are substantial.
Taking as an example the case of $50 per ton of C02, the income gain from
noncooperative actions is $63 billion per year. The most successful cooperation
regimes have gains of $312 billion per year. (Again, all are scaled to 2011 output
and prices.)
Figure 6 shows the extent to which different regimes succeed in achieving the
potential gains from cooperation. At benchmark levels of $12.5 and $25 per ton,
the regime captures all of the potential gains for tariff rates of 3 percent or more.
Similarly, at the $50 per ton rate, the Club achieves virtually all the potential gains
with tariff rates of 5 percent or more. However, for the highest target carbon price,
the regime gets very little of the potential gains except at the highest tariff rates.
F. Trade Inefficiencies
How large are the trade costs relative to the climate gains? Note to begin with
that there are no trade losses with full participation because there are no sanctions.
However, with partial participation, there will be efficiency losses because of the tariffs.
Consider a regime with a low tariff and a low target carbon price, for example,
a 1 percent tariff and a $25 per ton target carbon price. Here, there are six nonparticipants.
The gains from the regime are $34 billion while the trade inefficiencies
are $0.4 billion. At the other extreme, consider a $50 target price with a tariff of
6 percent. For this regime, there are only two nonparticipants. The gains from the
club are $228 billion, while the trade inefficiencies are $0.7 billion. In all cases, the
gains from cooperation far outweigh the trade losses.
G. To Join or Not to JoinAn
 interesting question is to determine which countries join and which stay out
of the Climate Club. On first principles, the joiners are those with low abatement
costs, low carbon-intensity, high damages, and high trade shares. Table 2 shows the
percentage of the cases where a specific region participates.
A related question is, who gains and who loses from the Climate Club? The
answer depends upon the regime that is chosen. Figure 7 shows the net gains and
losses for four different sets of parameters for seven major regions. All major
regions gain from the club relative to the noncooperative outcome. In the entire set
of 40 regimes and 15 regions, there are 69 (12 percent) cases where countries lose
relative to the noncooperative