In the final chapter of her book, Robinson (1933) laid out a model of a firm with a
combination of  price-setting and wage-setting power, and showed that the result was
a “double wedge” between marginal productivity and wages, reflecting the markup
of prices over marginal costs and the markdown of wages relative to value marginal
products.2 Why didn’t this idea catch onI
think there are several explanations. The first is that her framework describes
“perfect” monopoly and “perfect” monopsony. She offers very little guidance on
intermediate levels of market imperfection in either market, and says nothing about
the interactions between competing firms in such intermediate cases—a criticism
raised in the early review by Kaldor (1934) and freely acknowledged by Robinson
herself (Robinson 1953).3
A second and related reason is that the simple geometric apparatus developed by
Robinson (and also used by Chamberlain in his book published in the same year)
was not very useful for further analytical exercises. Stigler (1949) made this point
forcefully with respect to Chamberlain’s theory of monopolistic competition, arguing
“… it has not been useful in the concrete analysis of economic problems, in the
sense that it does not contain more accurate or more comprehensive implications
than neoclassical theory.” The importance of a tractable framework is underscored
by the current status of Chamberlain’s idea. Once Spence (1976) and Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977) wrote down constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) style models
models of consumer demand, and showed how to embed those preferences in a general
equilibrium setting, monopolistic competition took off, and is now a workhorse
model for problems in macroeconomics, international trade, and economic geography
(see Brakman and Heijdra 2004).
A third explanation is that in simple monopsony models, firms are ready and
willing to hire any qualified worker who is willing to accept their offered wage.
Indeed, a monopsonistic firm is always starved for labor. Proposing such a model in
the depths of the Great Depression was not ideal timing for Robinson. In contrast, in
today’s economy the idea of  labor-starved firms is more attractive.
Fourth, the question of how wages and prices are set got caught up in the grand
ideological debate over alternative economic systems that occupied many minds
during the twentieth century. Robinson rather dogmatically insisted that any divergence
between marginal products and wages represented a failure of market capitalism.
Chamberlain, for his part, spent many years defending the welfare properties
of monopolistic competition (e.g., Chamberlain, 1950). Throughout the 1930s and
into the Cold War era, economists were more interested in arguing about (often
ill-posed) normative questions than in understanding the positive implications of
alternative models of wage and price setting. In this context, Arthur Pigou’s labeling
of the gap between marginal productivity and wages as an index of “explo