desire minimal facilities want low dues, while those who prefer extensive coverage
choose more elaborate facilities with higher dues.
Let's take an experiment where we ask each country for its preferred international
target carbon price (always keeping the global SCC at $25 and its regional distribu-
tion unchanged). Using the C-DICE model, calculate the equilibrium coalition for
each treaty price between $0 and $200 per ton. Then, examining the welfare effects
for each region, ask which treaty carbon price is optimal for the region. For the
example chosen, the impacts on net regional incomes are roughly quadratic for low
prices because all regions participate. Above $34 per ton, countries begin to drop
out, so the calculations become clouded by the effects of participation.
Figure 8 and Table 3 show the distribution of preferred target carbon prices for
regions where the global SCC is $25. The curves show on the vertical axis the fraction
of regions that would prefer an international target carbon price at or below the target
price on the horizontal axis. The noncooperative regime is shown at the upper left
with the circle marked "NC." The curve to the left marked "preferred" shows the dis-
tribution of regional preferred rates (the distribution of first choices). The line marked
"breakeven" shows the distribution of prices at which the country would be indifferent
between the target price and a zero price. The breakeven is close to twice the preferred.
The median preferred international target carbon price using GDP weights is $28
per ton, which is slightly above the global SCC. The median breakeven carbon price is
$48 per ton. An important finding is that all regions prefer a weak regime to the non-
cooperative regime. Even the least enthusiastic region (South Africa) would prefer a
target price of $18 per ton to the $3 per ton NC equilibrium. Where the negotiations
would actually settle is an important question beyond the scope of the present study.
J. Unstable Regimes
Of the 44 regimes, 6 displayed coalitional instability, and these can be easily under-
stood. For example, 3 came with a $50 international target carbon price and low tariff
rates. For example, with a tariff rate of 2 percent, the solution cycled around among a
small number of quasi-stable coalitions with an average of 2.9 participants. The other
instabilities came with the $100 per ton target price and high tariff rates. For example,
with $100 per ton target price and a penalty tariff of 9 percent, the coalitions cycled
with an average number of participations of 3.9 regions.
The instabilities arise because the gains from participation are close to equal in
these different midsized coalitions. Hence, the solution cycles among quasi-stable
coalitions as each outbids the others. None of the regimes degenerates to the
noncooperative equilibrium. Rather, they cycle among similar numbers of partici-
pants and levels of abatement.
Another potential source of instability would arise if the damage function has a cat-
astrophic threshold (which has not been modeled in the C-DICE model framework).
In the limit, assume that if emissions pass some quantity (below the emissions in
the NC equilibrium), then damages for each region are unlimited. There will be
multiple combinations of abatement by different regions that can stay under the cat-
astrophic threshold. It might be stable to a single country leaving, but would not be
stable to multiple countries entering and leaving. This example suggests that highly
nonlinear damages open up a different set of issues for 