945
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
commitments by monetary policymakers to  so-called  lower-for-longer rate policies, 
which can add stimulus even when short rates are at the lower bound. And, for the 
most part, in retrospect it has become evident that the costs and risks attributed to the 
new tools, when first deployed, were overstated. The case for adding the new tools 
to the standard central bank toolkit thus seems clear.
But how much can the new tools help? To estimate the policy space provided 
by the new tools, I turn to simulations of the Fed’s FRB/US model (Brayton et al. 
2014). Assuming, importantly, that the (nominal) neutral rate of interest, defined 
more fully below, is in the range of 2 to 3 percent—consistent with most current 
estimates for the US economy—then the simulations suggest that a combination of 
asset purchases and forward guidance can add roughly 3 percentage points of policy 
space. That is, when the new tools are used, monetary policy can achieve outcomes 
similar to what traditional policies alone could attain if the neutral interest rate were 
3 percentage points higher, in the range of  5–6 percent—which, it turns out, is close 
to what is needed to negate the adverse effects of the effective lower bound in most 
circumstances. In particular, as I will argue, in this scenario the use of the new tools 
to increase policy space seems preferable to the alternative strategy of raising the 
central bank’s inflation target.
An important caveat to these conclusions, as already indicated, is that they apply 
fully only when the neutral interest rate is in the range of  2–3 percent or above. If the 
neutral rate is below 2 percent or so, the new tools still add valuable policy space but 
are unlikely to compensate entirely for the constraint imposed by the lower bound. 
The costs associated with a very low neutral rate, measured in terms of deeper and 
longer recessions and inflation persistently below target, underscore the importance 
for central banks of keeping inflation and inflation expectations close to target. A 
neutral rate below 2 percent or so also increases the relative attractiveness of alter -
native strategies for increasing policy space, such as raising the inflation target or 
relying more heavily on fiscal policy to fight recessions and to keep inflation and 
interest rates from falling too low.
I. Assessing the New Tools of Monetary Policy
When the  short-term policy interest rate reaches the effective lower bound, mon-
etary policymakers can no longer provide stimulus through traditional means.3 
However, it is still possible in those circumstances to add stimulus by operating 
on  longer-term interest rates and other asset prices and yields. Two tools for doing 
that, both actively used in recent years, are (i) central bank purchases of  longer-term 
financial assets (popularly known as quantitative easing, or QE), and (ii) communi-
cation from monetary policymakers about their economic outlooks and policy plans 
(forward guidance).4 I’ll discuss QE first, returning later to forward guidance, as 
well as to some other new tools used primarily outside the United States.
3 The term effective lower bound embraces the possibility of negative  short-term rates. In the United States, thus 
far the effective lower bound has been zero. I will use the term “lower bound” for short.
4 The popular use of the term QE blurs a useful distinction: QE as practiced by the Fed was importantly differ -
ent from the QE undertaken by the Bank of Japan before the crisis. The former emphasized the effects of buying 
 longer-term assets on  longer-term interest rates, the latter the effects of purchase on bank reserves and the monetary 
base. In general, increases in reserves per se should have limited benefit in a liquidity trap, being only a swap of 