951
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
revealed that, in a change unexpected by the primary dealers, bonds between 10 and 
30 years maturity would make up only about 6 percent of planned purchases, com-
pared to 15 percent in earlier rounds. If the portfolio balance channel is operating, 
that news should have led to a decline in the prices and a rise in the yields of the 
 longer-maturity bonds, relative to those with shorter maturity. That was indeed what 
the authors found.
Cahill et al. (2013) performed similar analyses of QE1, the Fed’s decision in 
August 2010 to keep its asset holdings constant by reinvesting the proceeds of 
maturing securities, the Maturity Extension Program, and the extension of the MEP 
that preceded QE3. (Their study was completed before the announcement of QE3.) 
They found in each case that unanticipated changes in implementation plans had 
significant  cross-sectional effects on bond prices and yields. Their estimated effects 
are both economically large and, importantly, show no tendency to decline over time 
or as the size of the central bank’s balance sheet increases. These results, which 
have been replicated in a number of studies, including for the United Kingdom, 
once again do not support the view that QE is only effective when markets are 
dysfunctional.9
Cahill et al. (2013), like most studies in this literature, looks at the differen-
tial impact of asset purchase programs on Treasury debt of varying maturity. But 
the Fed’s purchase programs also differed in how they treated Treasuries versus 
 mortgage-backed securities, with QE1 including substantial MBS purchases for 
example, but QE2 involving only purchases of Treasuries. If portfolio balance 
effects are at work, then unanticipated changes in the  Treasury-MBS mix should 
affect the relative yields of those asset classes. That too seems to have been the 
case, as illustrated for example by Krishnamurthy and  Vissing-Jorgenson (2011) in 
their comparison of the effects of QE1 and QE2. Relatedly, Di Maggio, Kermani, 
and Palmer (2015) considered the effects of the Fed’s QE programs on the relative 
returns to MBS issued by the GSEs, which were eligible for purchase by the Fed, 
and MBS backed by larger (jumbo) mortgages, which by law cannot be guaranteed 
by the GSEs and thus were not eligible for Fed purchase. These authors found that 
QE1, which included large quantities of MBS purchases, depressed mortgage rates 
in general by more than 100 basis points but reduced the rates on jumbo mortgages 
by only about half as much, consistent with the portfolio balance effect. In contrast, 
they found that QE2 and the Maturity Extension Program, neither of which included 
MBS purchases, did not differentially affect rates on  GSE-eligible mortgages and 
jumbo mortgages.
Note that studies of the  cross-sectional  asset-price impacts of QE announcements 
should reflect only portfolio balance effects. Studies have also found evidence of sig-
naling effects, that is, QE announcements tend to be associated with changes in the 
expected path of  short-term interest rates (Bauer and Rudebusch 2014). In the “taper 
tantrum” episode of 2013, market participants were surprised by my comments in a 
congressional testimony and a press conference that asset purchases might soon be 
9 An interesting example of a British study is McLaren, Banerjee, and Latto (2014). These authors consider 
three “natural experiments,” dates on which the Bank of England announced changes to the maturity distribution 
of its asset purchases, for reasons unrelated to monetary policy plans or objectives. They find strong local supply 
effects (higher prices for assets favored by the changes in plans) which do not fade over time. Studies finding similar 
results for the UK include Joyce and Tong (2012) and Meaning and Zhu (2011). 