of peaks and troughs, a slump lasts from the time when employment falls below its
normal level during the contraction to the time when employment regains its normal
level during an expansion. Thus a slump spans the trough date. Usually most of the
slump occurs after the trough, during the period of low but positive growth. Everybody
but business-cycle specialists uses the term "recession" to describe a slump.
The more serious slumps in US economic history have followed financial crises.
In the case of the slump that began at the end of 2007 but became severe after the
crisis of September 2008?the Great Slump?the origin in the financial events of
the earlier years of the decade seems obvious. Years of stable and rising house prices
made levered positions in real-estate-related assets seem quite safe. Regulators permitted
 increases in leverage, especially for investment banks and other financial
entities thought to be free from government guarantees and the accompanying need
for government supervision. The Securities and Exchange Commission altered capital
 requirements for investment banks in 2004 and their leverage rose. Risk analysis
and loan underwriting used probability distributions that assigned zero probability
to significant declines in housing prices. Credit became available to households who
were denied access under earlier standards. The result was a bulge in homebuilding
and sales of cars and other consumer durables, together with a corresponding bulge
in consumer debt.
The wholly unexpected decline in housing prices brought the financial crisis.
Commercial banks required help from the government that they had reason to expect.
Events showed that the precarious conditions of other large financial entities?investment
 banks, insurance companies, and money-market funds?threatened the stability
 of the entire financial system, so they, too, received government assistance. The
government's hands-off treatment of Lehman Brothers appeared to demonstrate the
vulnerability of the financial system to the failure of an entity previously thought to be
outside the class requiring protection and supervision. The crisis disabled the financial