It is natural to impute popular contemporary models to the government. The "revisionist history"
of the US Phillips curve by Robert G. King and Mark W. Watson (1994) provides a good
source for these. King and Watson studied how econometric directions of fit (i.e., should one
regress inflation on unemployment or unemployment on inflation?) affect government decisions.
To make contact with studies from the 1970s, King and Watson call regressions of inflation on
unemployment the Keynesian direction of fit and unemployment on inflation the classical direction.
26 I impute simplified versions of more completely articulated models to the government.27
These simple models capture the substantially different operating characteristics that drive our
stories.
The three stories have monetary authorities solve adaptive intelligent design problems that
induce them to make decisions that are influenced by their erroneous views about the consequences
of actions not taken. The stories differ in the nature of those misunderstandings. In
the first story, the monetary authority's misspecified model misses a chain of causation linking
its decisions first to the private sector's expectations of inflation and then to the position of
an unemployment-inflation trade-off. In the second story, there exists a parameter vector 0o =
p that aligns the monetary authority's model with the data-generating mechanism on and off
the chosen stochastic monetary policy path, but except in the limit as t ?? ??, the government's
temporary misestimates 0, of 0o induce it to misunderstand the consequences of policies that
it chooses not to implement. In the third story, the government mixes across submodels with
operating characteristics that give very different readings about the consequences of following a
no-feedback low-inflation policy.
A. The (Temporary) Conquest of US Inflation
This story is about generating sufficient variation in the data to allow a government's misspecified
model to detect that there is no exploitable trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
The only way the government's model lets it discover that there truly is no exploitable trade-off
is for it falsely to infer that there is no trade-off whatsoever. That imperfection dooms stabilizations
of inflation to be temporary.
This story uses specifications f{ycc,vcc\p) "?f(yx,v?\0) to capture the idea that a monetary
authority misunderstands how its decisions affect private agents' expectations about inflation
and, therefore, the joint distribution of unemployment and inflation. I illustrate the forces at work
with the following simplified version of a model that Christopher A. Sims (1988), Cho, Williams,
and Sargent (2002), and Sargent and Williams (2005) studied and that Heetaik Chung (1990),
Sargent (1999), and Sargent, Williams, and Zha (2006b) fit to US data. The true model is
(20) U = p0 - Pip3w2 + p2Wi ;
(21) 77 = v + p3w2,
where U is the unemployment rate, rr is the rate of inflation, v is the systematic part of the inflation
rate chosen by the monetary authority, w is a 2 X 1 Gaussian random vector with mean zero
stability and performance of alternative monetary policy rules See Timothy Cogley (2005) and Monika Piazzesi and  Martin Schneider (2007) for applications to the yield curve