Club. Participation requires countries to have a domestic carbon price at least as
high as the minimum international target carbon price. The choice of climate policies
is simple. A nonparticipant will choose the low NC carbon price because that
maximizes national welfare for nonparticipants. Similarly, a participant will choose
the higher international target carbon price to meet its obligations because that maximizes
its economic welfare conditional on participation.

In considering whether or not to participate in the high-abatement cooperative
regime, countries face two sets of costs. The first cost is the additional abatement
cost (net of reduced damages) of participation. The additional abatement costs are
greater than the reduced damages. This fact shows immediately why countries will
not voluntarily depart from the NC equilibrium without some further inducements
to participate.

The second impact of the decision on participation is due to trade impacts. The
present study analyzes a uniform tariff on all goods and services imposed by participants
on the imports from nonparticipants into the Climate Club. Figure 2 shows the
basic structure of the tariff arrangements. As shown in the two cells on the left, the
Club treaty authorizes penalty tariffs on nonparticipants into the Club region, with no
penalty tariffs on intra-Club trade. The two cells on the right indicate that there are
no tariffs, which assumes no reaction or retaliation of non-Club members to the Club.
VI. Algorithmic Issues

Finding the equilibrium coalition, as well as determining stability and uniqueness,
is computationally demanding. Consider a global Climate Club with n regions.
The payoffs are functions of the parameters of the game, including output, emissions,
damages, the trade technology, and the tariff penalty function. In addition, the
payoffs depend up the participation of each of the other players.

In the most general version, discussed above in the section on bottom-up coalitions,
there may be multiple coalitions (i.e., regional groupings). This outcome

is seen in trade associations and military alliances formed on the basis of costs,
location, and ideologies. In the case of multiple coalitions, there will be on the order
of n! possible coalitions. For our study, with 15 regions and multiple regimes, that
would consist of about 1012 coalitions and would be computationally infeasible.
However, in the case of global climate change, it is more natural to consider
a situation where countries decide whether to join a single global climate treaty.
Assuming a single coalition has the computational advantage that it limits the number
of potential coalitions to 2" (or 32,768) coalitions, which can easily be calculated.
The problem is combinatorial in nature, and its solution is thought to be in the
class of NP-hard problems (Wooldridge and Dunne 2004) .There appears to be no
efficient algorithm for calculating stable coalitions (Rahwan 2007). In principle, we
would need to take each of the 2" coalitions and determine whether they are stable
against all the other 2" - 1 coalitions, which requires about 22" « 109 comparisons.
While this is computationally feasible, it is unnecessarily burdensome, particularly
for model construction and comparison of regimes.

I therefore settled on an evolutionary algorithm to find stable coalitions. This is
similar to a genetic algorithm except that it considers mutations of all elements rather
than just local searches. This proceeds in the following steps: (i) Start w