to bargain and their lesser desire to compete.9 Still others blame it on differential
employer promotion standards due to gender differences in the probability of
leaving.10
The existing explanations for the residual gender pay gap regarding how women
compete and bargain relative to men have some merit. But they do not explain why
different amounts of time out of the labor force and different numbers of hours
worked per day or per week have a large effect on the time-adjusted earnings in
some occupations but not in others. They do not explicate why some positions have
a highly nonlinear (convex) pay structure with regard to hours worked and some are
almost perfectly linear. 1 1
The alternative reasons for the residual gender pay gap do not help illuminate why
earnings differences by sex expand so greatly with age. They also do not explain
why women without children generally have higher earnings than women with children
and why the former's earnings are almost equal to those of comparable men.12
A better answer, I will demonstrate, can be found in an application of personnel
economics.13 The explanation will rely on labor market equilibrium with compensating
differentials and endogenous job design.
As women have increased their productivity enhancing characteristics and as
they "look" more like men, the human capital part of the wage difference has been
squeezed out. What remains is largely how firms reward individuals who differ in
their desire for various amenities. These amenities are various aspects of workplace
flexibility. Workplace flexibility is a complicated, multidimensional concept. The
term incorporates the number of hours to be worked and also the particular hours
worked, being "on call," providing "face time," being around for clients, group
meetings, and the like. Because these idiosyncratic temporal demands are generally
more important for the highly-educated workers, I will emphasize the college educated
and occupations at the higher end of the earnings distribution.
Jobs for which bargaining and competing matter the most, I will demonstrate, are
also positions that have the greatest nonlinearities (meaning convexity) of pay with
respect to time worked. Field and laboratory experiments often show that women
shy away from competition.14 But these experiments do not consider the types of
jobs that reward competition the most. Often those are winner-take-all positions,
such as partner in a firm, tenured professor at a university, or top manager. These are
also positions for which considerable work hours leads to a higher chance of obtaining
the reward, and it is often the case that hours alone get rewarded. Persistence in
these positions and continuous time on the job probably matters far more to one's
success than a desire and ability t