the yield curve. Chronically low interest rates pose a challenge for the traditional
approach to monetary policymaking, based on the management of a  short-term pol-
icy interest rate. In the presence of an effective lower bound on nominal interest
rates—due to, among other reasons, the existence of cash, which provides investors
the option of earning a zero nominal return—persistently low nominal rates con-
strain the amount of “space” available for traditional monetary policies. Moreover,
as the experience of Japan in recent decades has demonstrated, low inflation can
become a  self-perpetuating trap, in which low inflation and low nominal interest
rates make monetary policy less effective, which in turn allows low inflation or
deflation to persist.
In the United States and other advanced economies, the critical turning point was
the global financial crisis of  2007–2009. The shock of the panic, and the subsequent
sovereign debt crisis in Europe, drove the US and global economies into deep reces-
sion, well beyond what could be managed by traditional monetary policies. After
cutting  short-term rates to zero (or nearly so), the Federal Reserve and other central
banks turned to alternative policy tools to provide stimulus, including  large-scale
purchases of financial assets (quantitative easing), increasingly explicit communi-
cation about the central bank’s outlook and policy plans (forward guidance), and,
outside the United States, some other tools as well.
We are now more than a decade from the crisis, and the US and global economies
are in much better shape. But, looking forward, the Fed and other central banks are
grappling with how best to manage monetary policy in a  twenty-first century context
of low inflation and low nominal interest rates. On one point we can be certain: the
old methods won’t do. For example, simulations of the Fed’s main macroecono-
metric model suggest that the use of policy rules developed before the crisis would
result in  short-term rates being constrained by zero as much as  one-third of the time,
with severe consequences for economic performance (Kiley and Roberts 2017). If
monetary policy is to remain relevant, policymakers will have to adopt new tools,
tactics, and frameworks.
The subject of this lecture is the new tools of monetary policy, particularly
those used in recent years by the Federal Reserve and other  advanced-economy
central banks.1 I focus on quantitative easing and forward guidance, the principal
new tools used by the Fed, although I briefly discuss some other tools, such as
funding-for-lending programs, yield curve control, and negative interest rates. Based
on a review of a large and growing literature, I argue that the new tools have proven
quite effective, providing substantial additional scope for monetary policy despite
the lower bound on  short-term interest rates.2 In particular, although there are dis-
senting views, most research finds that central bank asset purchases meaningfully
ease financial conditions, even when financial markets are not unusually stressed.
Forward guidance has become increasingly valuable over time in helping the pub-
lic understand how policy will respond to economic conditions and i