earnings have a nonlinear relationship with respect to hours. A flexible schedule
often comes at a high price, particularly in the corporate, financial, and legal worlds.
A compensating differentials model explains wage differences by the costs of
flexibility. The framework developed here shows why there are higher or lower costs
of time flexibility and the underlying causes of nonlinearity of earnings with respect
to time worked. Much has to do with the presence of good substitutes for individual
workers when there are sufficiently low transactions costs of relaying information.
Evidence from 0*Net on occupational characteristics demonstrates that certain
features of occupations that create time demands and reduce the degree of substitu-
tion across workers are associated with larger gender earnings gaps.
Data for MBAs and JDs shows large increases in gender pay gaps with time since
graduation and also reveals the relationship between the increasing gender pay gap
and the desire for time flexibility due to the arrival of children. Lower hours mean
lower earnings in a nonlinear (convex) fashion. Lower potential earnings, particu-
larly among those with higher-earning spouses, often means lower labor force par-
ticipation. Pharmacists, on the other hand, have pay that is more linear with respect
to hours of work. Female pharmacists with children often work part-time and remain
in the labor force rather than exiting.
What must be in this chapter for it to be the last? The last chapter must be con-
cerned with how worker time is allocated, used and remunerated and it must involve
a reduction in the dependence of remuneration on particular segments of time. It
must involve greater independence and autonomy for certain types of workers and
the ability of workers to substitute seamlessly for each other. Flexibility at work has
become a prized benefit but flexibility is of less value if it comes at a high price in
terms of earnings. The various types of temporal flexibility require changes in the
structure of work so that their cost is reduced.
There are many occupations and sectors that have moved in the direction of less
costly flexibility. Firms in many sectors, including healthcare, retail sales, banking,
brokerage, and real estate, are making their employees better substitutes for each other
and trying to convince their clients of that.46 When clients perceive there is a greater
degree of substitutability among workers, a more linear payment schedule emerges.
Pharmacists are now better substitutes for each other than they once were and
their earnings are fairly linear with regard to time worked. Larger scale in healthcare
has enabled teamwork that has freed physicians from irregular and long hours. Most
small veterinary practices no longer have weekend, night, and emergency hours
and, instead, have clients use the increasing number of large regional veterinary
hospitals. Self-employment has declined in a large number of professions the past
several decades including dentists, lawyers, optometrists, pharmacists, physicians,
and veterinarians. The decline has produced a reduction in the premium to long and
unpredictable hours.
Some changes have occurred organically, often due to economies of scale (as in
the cases of physicians, pharmacists and veterinarians), some changes have been
prompted by employee pressure (as in the case of various physician specialties such
as pediatricians), and other changes have occurred because firms want t