be somewhat greater in today's world than in decades past, since established news
media are in upheaval after the relatively recent advent of modem information tech-
nology and social media. But in past decades we can also observe that narratives
with no factual basis were widely disseminated and believed. For instance, until
modern times, it was asserted that women were not capable of learning men's occu-
pations (Goldin 2014). Similarly, it was argued that some racial or ethnic groups
were not really capable of integrating into civilized society (Myrdal 1974). How
people could believe these views in the past seems hard to imagine today because
we are no longer immersed in their narratives.
Disturbingly, Oxford Dictionaries in 2016 gave post-truth as "international word
of the year."2 Are narratives becoming increasingly based on false ideas? This pos-
sibility is something we ought to try to understand better. Among normal people,
narratives are often somewhat dishonest and manipulative. In a competitive market
where competitors manipulate customers and profit margins have been competed
away to normal levels, no one company can choose not to engage in similar manip-
ulations. If they tried, they might be forced into bankruptcy. A phishing equilibrium
with a certain equilibrium acceptable level of dishonesty in narrative is established
(Akerlof and Shiller 2015).
I. The Role of Narratives Broadly, in the Social Sciences and the Humanities
When we as economists want to understand the most significant economic events
in our history, such as the Great Depression of the 1930s, or subsequent recessions,
or policies toward wealth and poverty, we rarely focus on the important narratives
that accompanied them. We have lagged behind other disciplines in attending to the
importance of narratives (Figure 1), and while all disciplines use narratives more
since 2010, economics (and finance) remain laggards. This is despite calls for econ-
omists' attention to social dynamics and popular models (Shiller 1984); to a new
culturomics (Michel et al. 2005); or humanomics (McCloskey 2016); or for more
narrativeness in economics (Morson and Schapiro 2017). We see little use of enor-
mous databases of written word that might be used to study narratives.
Some would say that the field of history has always had an appreciation for nar-
ratives. However, historians need also to be reminded sometimes that a deep under-
standing of history requires imputing what was on the minds of those people who
made history, what their narratives were, as historian Ramsay MacMullen implored
in his book, Feelings in History: Ancient and Modern (2003). He does not literally
stress the concept of narratives: he has told me he would prefer a word conveying
"stimulus to some emotional response, and there is no such word." But he shows that
if we try to understand people's actions, we will need to replicate in ourselves as
best we can the feelings they themselves experienced, and his book describes many
of the narratives that in history communicated such feelings.
In the social sciences, the last half-century saw the blossoming of schools of
thought that emphasized study of popular narratives, a study that has been variously
named as narrative psychology (Sarbin 1986); storytelling socio