Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Formerly, there were monetary economists who argued that the central bank bal
ance sheet is an accounting fiction, of no substantive interest. It is true that the
implications of having negative net worth at current market values are different for
a central bank and an ordinary firm or private bank. A firm with negative net worth
is likely to find its creditors demanding payment, and is unlikely to be able to pay
them all. A central bank can "print money"—offer deposits as payment for its bills.
It will not be subject to the usual sort of run, then, in which creditors fear not being
paid and hence demand immediate payment. Its liabilities are denominated in gov
ernment paper, which it can produce at will.
On top of this, most economists have thought of central banks as part of the gov
ernment, with the only balance sheet that really matters being that of the government
as a whole.
But both of these arguments come apart when the central bank aims at control
ling the price level and fiscal and monetary policy are not set jointly. Traditional
contractionary open market operations require selling assets to shrink the amount
of reserve deposits and currency. If the central bank is in the red, an aggressively
contractionary policy may not be possible, because people will see that it would
require selling more assets than the central bank actually has.5 If the negative-net
worth central bank tries to contract by raising interest rates on reserves, yet wants to
avoid expanding reserves, it is likely to need to sell assets to finance the interest on
reserves, again putting it on an unsustainable path. Of course, if the treasury stands
ready to back up the central bank—providing additional assets to the central bank in
the form of interest-bearing securities whenever necessary—then the central bank
balance sheet is indeed irrelevant.
In thinking about central bank policy when fiscal backing from the treasury is
absent or uncertain, it helps to consider what "fiscal backing" the central bank can
provide on its own, without assistance from the treasury. Of course central banks
cannot impose explicit taxes, but they do have access to an implicit tax: seignor
age. Even if its balance sheet shows negative net worth at current market values, a
central bank can maintain a uniquely determined price level by using its seignorage
revenues to restore its balance sheet. But seignorage revenue depends on the infla
tion rate, generally increasing with the rate of inflation except at extremely high
inflation rates. A central bank with a severely enough impaired balance sheet may
not be able to pin down the price level without treasury assistance, but modestly
negative net worth can generally be "worked off' by seignorage. Of course most
central banks see their task as maintaining low inflation, so balance sheet problems,
by requiring inflation to generate seignorage, can be an obstacle to the central bank's
achieving its policy objectives. Even a central bank with positive net worth may be
inhibited in taking some policy actions by fear of the consequences of negative net
worth. Lender of last resort operations, for example, even when they have positive
expected return, generally pose some risk of losses. A central bank with uncertain