and similarly for other individuals. In the case of large n, if <f> > 2/3 we have a Nash equilibrium
with positive public effort:
(3) JC--2- r-3^-2 v - A(t> ?_ 0(4-3^)
2-0' 7* (2-0)2' ,_ (2-0)2 '
As 0 increases from 2/3 to 1, the solution in (3) moves monotonically from the purely selfish
 Nash equilibrium (1) to the purely cooperative optimum (2). A higher <j> in this range raises
everyone's private utility.
Next, suppose there is a succession of generations. Each individual has one child, whose selfish
utility is denoted by u^ defined similarly to the ut above. The parent has private family utility
f = ut + 6 w;c.
Education can instill a social utility with parameter (j) into each child. The cost of this per
capita is t given by
Although each parent cares only about the family utility, he/she recognizes that instilling
sufficient prosocial preference in all children will increase the child's private utility. Each generation
 votes on a tax t per capita to finance education. Since there is no heterogeneity, the t that
maximizes the parent's net private family utility f ? t will emerge as the Condorcet winner.
Calculation shows that if S > 36 k, the optimum choice of <\> is given by
, 2(1-0) u A fk^3  x - v ; where 0 - ' K
Y 2-0 \6
When ? is at its lower limit, 5 = 36 k, we have 8 = 0.305, and then 0 = 0.82. At the other extreme,
when k is very small compared to <5, 0 is close to 0 and (j) is close to 1.
The interesting aspect here is the double dimension of other-regarding preferences?toward
one's own children and toward strangers?and their interaction. The former is present in a natural
 way, and in this context it is served by instilling the latter.
This "starter" example can be generalized into a full-fledged model in many ways. The most
important feature to introduce is heterogeneity. People in a given society differ in the extent
of their selfish or prosocial behavior, and societies and cultures around the world differ in this
respect; see Camerer (2003, 63-75). To model this, we can have a genetically determined distribution
 of 4> in the population, and education can shift this distribution to the right in the sense of
first-order stochastic dominance. Individuals can differ in their patience; those with high ? will
vote for a higher amount of social spending t per capita on education, and the median voter's
most preferred t will be implemented.
VI. Evolution and Reform of Governance Institutions
In the discussion of theories and case studies above, we identified many characteristics of institutions
 that are conducive to good economic governance and therefore to the proper underpinning
 of well-functioning markets. Of course, these are only necessary conditions, not sufficient
ones. Other institutions and policies?a stable macroeconomic environment, a broadly open
regime for trade and investment flows, and many other dimensions of good policies?are also