NYC play an active role in admissions. So the stability of the resulting matching
was an important feature of the design: there was evidence that in the prior system, which did not produce stable matchings, school principals sometimes concealed places from the NYC Department of Education, to be able to match later with stu-dents they preferred to those to whom they might otherwise have been assigned.
Data from the preferences over schools that students submit to the current clearinghouse
allow Abdulkadiro˘ glu, Agarwal, and Pathak (2017) to compare the welfare effects of the matchings produced by the centralized school choice system to those under the old, “uncoordinated” admissions. Using the (ordinal) rank order lists submitted by students, they assess welfare by estimating a cardinal random utility model, with trade-offs among school attributes measured in terms of the additional distance a student is willing to travel to be at a more preferred school.
63 They find
that the students placed administratively when the old congested system ran out of time were generally placed in less desirable schools than those over which they had expressed preferences. Furthermore, in the old system there was more “recon-tracting,” in which students ultimately entered different schools than those to which they had been assigned, than in the new system. They find that the new system improves welfare over the old by 80 percent of the gains that could be achieved by a utility-maximizing allocation made independent of stability constraints, and that changes in the algorithm (e.g., choosing a different stable matching, among the multiple that arise from random tie-breaking) would have very little additional effect on welfare.
64
The biggest difference is that under the old system, only about one-half of the
students were placed in the “main round” (now occupied by the deferred acceptance algorithm), whereas in the new system this number climbed to over 80 percent in the first year (with additional subsequent gains). So students who used to be assigned administratively are now largely assigned by the deferred acceptance algorithm to a school over which they have expressed a preference. That turns out to be much better for them than assignment without regard to their preferences.