with b brought in line with stochastically fluctuating future government spending by
surprise inflation and deflation.

However, these results all depend on surprise inflation and deflation being cost
less. In a Keynesian model with sticky prices or wages, or in a model with incom
plete markets and borrowing and lending via standard debt contracts in nominal
terms, surprise inflation has a substantial cost. Schmidt-Grohé and Uribe (2001)
showed that in a New Keynesian model with one-period government debt, opti

mal policy is much closer to Barro's (1979) initial prescription than to a constant-r
policy. It makes a great deal of difference, though, whether government debt is long
or short term. When debt is short, as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe's setup, inflation
or deflation is the only way to change its market value in response to government
spending surprises. But if the debt is long term, large changes in the value of the debt
can be produced by changes in the nominal interest rate, with much smaller changes
in inflation. Interest rates fluctuate widely and their fluctuations are not thought of
as very costly, while price fluctuations may generate inefficient output and employ
ment fluctuations. The model of this section revisits Barro's (1979) framework,
adding endogenous price determination and allowing for short or long debt. It con
cludes that substantial use of the nominal debt fiscal cushion to limit tax fluctuations
may be optimal if debt maturity is long.

Following Barro (1979), we model the government as wanting to minimize the

deadweight loss from taxation, modeled as proportional to r2, the square of total
revenue. But we add to his specification a concern with wide swings in inflation,
leading to the objective function

Î"H£-■)')]■

It simplifies notation for us to use the single symbol ut — P,_x/P, to denote the
inverse of the gross inflation rate from this point on. There is a constant real interest
rate, and private sector behavior requires the real rate to match the expected nominal
return on a bond:

(31) R,Etut+1 = p.

The government budget constraint is

(32) b, = R,_iU,bl_l - T, + g„

where b is real debt and g, is government spending, which we treat as an exogenous
stochastic process. The government then maximizes (30) by choosing R, P, b, and
T subject to the two constraints (31) and (32). The first order conditions for an opti
mum are

(33) dr: t, = X,

(30)

(34)

db: A t = 0RtE,[ut+l\t+l]
