this abundant information and to choose whom to interview from the large pool of
candidates, while avoiding competition from other judges. This eventually proved to be an effective form of competition, so that more and more judges moved earlier and earlier.
The judges most inclined to move early were those who could offer good posi-
tions to the most desirable clerkship candidates, but not the very most desirable positions. In an orderly market, these candidates could expect to be able to choose among the most prestigious positions, but a judge with a slightly less attractive posi-tion might succeed in hiring top candidates—e.g., some of those who had been elected Editor in Chief of their school’s law review—if the judge could deliver an exploding offer first. (See, e.g., Judge Alex Kozinski 1991, in an appropriately titled article on his recruiting practices.) Judge Kozinski was in the West Coast Ninth Circuit, the largest in the country, but less prestigious than some of the East Coast Circuits, particularly the DC Circuit.
In contrast, judges in the most prestigious circuit court of appeals have the most
interest in having the market operate with lots of information, since then they can identify the best students, who they would have a good chance of hiring, in a thick market. But as other judges hired clerks earlier, via exploding offers, their oppor -
tunity to do this waned. The DC Circuit formally announced its abandonment of the plan in January 2013, saying that if other judges were going to go early then so would they,
41 and the plan was formally laid to rest the following year.42 The mar -
ket very quickly unraveled back into the summer after the first year of law school, when clerkship offers were once again mostly finalized. Judges with competitive clerkships made offers to candidates without the information about them that would have been available if the market operated later, and most applicants accepted the first offer they received.
But hope springs eternal: in February 2018 the DC Circuit announced its support
of a new attempt to control the timing of clerk hires (see United States Court of Appeals District of Columbia Circuit 2018). Future law clerks already in their sec-ond or third year of law school had already been hired by this time, but the courts’ plan is to defer the hiring of those who just entered law school in Fall 2017. It will have implications for hiring starting in 2019, and again in 2020, after which it will be reviewed. The plan does have a new feature: it will attempt to ban exploding offers by requiring that offers remain open for 48 hours. To my jaundiced eye it does not appear very promising—this will be the seventh such attempt to halt unraveling in this market since 1983. So I predict that either there will be more rules added in an attempt to make the market design more robust to the kinds of failures observ