London than in Canton. This, of course, suggests that real wage rates may not have
been so different in the two places in 1704.
The second and third columns of Table 1 provide estimates of the budget shares for
expenditures on various goods for both London and Canton, respectively. Using the
English budget shares suggests that nominal prices were about three times higher in
London than in Canton, while using the Chinese budget shares suggests that nominal
prices were nearly five times higher in London than in Canton. This is an example of the
classic index number problem, which in this case results from different budget shares
in the two countries. From the point of view of a Cantonese, real wages are higher in
Canton than in London because the work it would take to purchase a Cantonese life
style would be more in London than in Canton. Of course, precisely the opposite is the
case from the point of view of a Londoner. An average of these two real wage measures,
which is one version of an "ideal" index, implies that real wage rates were about the
same in Canton and London before the industrial revolution in England.2
It is my impression that this finding about the broad uniformity of real wage rates
across space in the period before the industrial revolution is slowly being confirmed
as a key fact in the history of economic development. Perhaps this accounts for the
broad pessimism of the classical economists about the prospect for long-run growth
in real wage rates.
B. Wage Rates during and after the Industrial Revolution
Douglas (1930) painstakingly constructed estimates of real wage rates in manu
facturing in the United States from 1890-1914. Douglas's results had the surprising
implication that, even though output per man hour increased in this period of indus
trial growth, real wage rates did not. The Douglas series for nominal wage rates is
displayed in Figure 1 along with an alternative series constructed many years later
by Rees (1961) when he revisited this puzzle. Douglas's real wage index is dis
played in Figure 3 and shows remarkable stability.
Rees speculated that (i) an increased labor supply, caused either by the closing
of the American frontier and an increase in immigration, or (ii) an increase in the
return to capital, might explain the puzzle. But the evidence from the growth in real
wage rates in the period after 1914 seemed inconsistent with either explanation.
An alternative possibility was that either the nominal wage or the price series had
missed some change in the key facts.
Rees expanded his nominal wage series to provide increased coverage of non
union wage rates, which Douglas had used less extensively. The two series on nomi
nal wage rates are shown in Figure 1 and differ in an expected direction, but their
trend turned out to be no different.
With respect to his new price index, Rees undertook a serious attempt to include
data on the prices of manufactured consumer products, which had been difficult
for Douglas to capture. Rees's main innovation was the use of detailed prices and