they would stop eating meat altogether to spite them. But the narrative epidemic was
unfazed by the end of the war.
The popular author Henry Hazlitt wrote in 1920
Hence, we have self-righteous individuals on every corner denouncing
the outrages and robberies committed by a sordid world. The butcher is
amazed at the profiteering of the man who sells him shoes; the shoe salesman
is astounded at the effrontery of the theatre ticket speculator; the theatre
ticket speculator is staggered at the high-handedness of his landlord;
the landlord raises his hands to high heaven at the demands of his coal
man, and the coal man collapses at the prices of the butcher. 15
US Senator Arthur Capper was reported in January 1920 as saying "Profiteers
are more dangerous than Reds" and urged consumers to "boycott the profit hogs
by refusing to buy goods offered at extortionate prices."16 Perhaps the 1920-1921
recession might better be thought of as the 1920-1921 consumer boycott.
But it wasn't just anger at profiteers that curtailed consumption. The story that
consumer prices would fall dramatically, a story which had good contagion since it
was associated with the profiteer narrative, was not so much told as intimated thousands
of times during the 1920-1921 recession when newspapers heralded some
individual prices that had indeed fallen to 1913 or 1914 levels. This is typical newspaper
reporting, with writers attempting to make an otherwise marginally interesting
story engaging to general readers. The newspapers knew that at a time of deflation,
readers were responsive to such stories because to the untrained mind, it seemed
natural that once the war was over, prices would return to their old levels: very
important to someone trying to decide whether to buy a new house or car.
Waiting to buy discretionary items until the prices fell seemed an obvious strategy
to many, but doing so brought on a depression. As one observer wrote in 1920:
"The buying public knows that the war is over and has reached the point where it
refuses to pay war prices for articles. Goods do not move, for people simply will
not buy."17 There was populist anger and protests against profiteering manufacturers
and retailers. The protests took on moral dimensions: "If people determine to buy
foodstuffs or anything else only what they actually cannot do without, the working
of the inexorable law of supply and demand will operate automatically to bring
conditions to a more normal state."18 Thrift became a new virtue. This 1913 standard
was framed as a magical number. In January 1920 the Commissioner of Labor
Statistics, Royal Meeker, noted that his agency had started its retail price index in
1913 - a date many believed to be a grounding point for the price level which would
lead them to delay purchases: "The prices we kicked about in 1913 have come to be
regarded as ideal" but he said that was a mistaken ideal.
Apparently, his words did not have immediate impact, and people did indeed hold
off buying, out of both anger at the narratives of selfish profiteers and the perceived
opportunity to profit from postponing their purchases during a time of fal