This model implies that from a small number of initial infectives, the number
infected and contagious itself follows a bell-shaped curve, rising at first, then falling.
A mutation in an old much-reduced disease may produce a single individual who
is infective, and then there will be a lag, possibly a long lag if c is small, before the
disease has infected enough people to be noticed in public. The epidemic will then
rise to a peak, and then fall and come to an end without any change in the infection
or removal rates, and before everyone is infected.
Figure 2 shows an example, implied by the three equations above, with N = 100
people, of very small transmission of infection per unit of time on any one expo-
sure, 70 = 1, c - 0.005, r = 0.05. In this case, almost 100 percent of the population
eventually gets infected. During an actual epidemic, public attention tends to focus
on the number of infectives, seen here as a bell-shaped curve skewed to the right.
Not everyone will ever catch the disease, as some completely escape for lack of
effective encounter with an infective, and gradually it gets safer and safer for them
because the infectives are becoming more and more reduced in number as they get
over the disease and are immune to it, so there are not enough new encounters to
generate sufficient new infectives to keep the disease on the growth path. Eventually,
the infectives almost disappear, and the population consists almost entirely of sus-
ceptibles and recovereds.
What creates a big disease that ultimately reaches a lot of people (the total ever
infected and recovered as measured by 7?^)? It is a function of the ratio c/r of the
two parameters. As time goes to infinity, the number of people who have ever had
the disease goes to a limit R ^ (called the size of the epidemic) strictly less than N. It
follows directly from the first and third equations that dS/dR - -(c/r)S and the ini-
tial condition 70 that S = (N - 70) e ~&R and since 7^ = 0, N = we have
C_
C_ r
If we could choose c and r, we could make the size of the epidemic anything
we want between 70 and N. Higher c/r corresponds to higher size of epidemic Rœ,
regardless of the level of c or of r, while higher c itself, holding c/r constant, yields a
faster epidemic. If we define "going viral" by R ^ > N/2, then we see this happening
in this example when c/r > 0.014.
If we multiply both parameters, c and r, by any constant a, then the same equa-
tions are satisfied by S(at), I(at), R(at). This means, depending on the two parame-
ters c and r, that there can be both fast and slow epidemics that look identical if the
plot is rescaled. If we also vary the ratio c/r, we can have epidemics that play out
over days and reach 95 percent of the population, or epidemics that play out over
decades and reach 95 percent of the population, or epidemics that play out over days
and reach only 5 percent of the population, or epidemics that play out over decades
and reach 5 percent of the population. But in each case, we can have hump-shaped
patterns of infectives that on rescaling look something like that in Figure 2.
The Kermack-McKendrick SIR model has formed a starting point for mathemati-
cal models of epidemics that have, over 90 years since, produced a huge literature. The
basic compartmental model, the SIR model, has been modified to allow for gradual
loss of immunity, so that recovereds are gradually transformed into suscep