and material balance at full employment:
(12) c2 = f(jn9f(n9k0 - cx)).
It's obvious that the only possible standard equilibrium with government trading
occurs when the government trades at the equilibrium price for the economy without
government trading, r > r*, in which case the government will not find any takers
for its proposed trade.
A government issuing currency with a return of r > r* is doing something fundamentally
uneconomic that no private organization would do?it is overcompensat
ing people who lend to it.
The conclusion:
PROPOSITION: In the presence of currency yielding more than the equilibrium
real interest rate, the economy has no standard equilibrium.
It is important to emphasize that this proposition says nothing about what mischief
follows when the government goes ahead and offers to trade at a price above r*. As
I noted above, consumers would value the opportunity to trade at any price different
from r*. They would line up outside the government office where they could sign up
for the deal. Something would happen in that economy. The key question is what
kind of non-standard equilibrium results from the government's offer to trade at the
wrong price.
Figure 15 also shows a line with a more negative slope than the dashed line corresponding
to the equilibrium real interest rate. The household can trade along this
line by holding currency and thus reach a superior indifference curve. The story
behind that action is natural: The household finds it desirable to reduce first-period
consumption and increase second-period consumption. Workers in the household
are paid in currency, so all the household does is hold onto the currency rather than
spend it on current consumption.
The point on the superior indifference curve cannot be an equilibrium under any
reasonable definition, because the economy is physically incapable of supplying
that combination of cx and c2. On the other hand, the standard equilibrium is also not
an equilibrium of the economy with high-yielding currency. Households will always
break that equilibrium by hanging on to their currency.
B. Low-Employment Equilibrium
The Availability of Currency Breaks the Standard Equilibrium.?What then happens
in this economy? This question goes to the heart of the issue. The government
is causing a major problem in the economy by offering too good a deal. People try to
hold onto any currency that falls into their hands, rather than spending it right away.
Economies in slumps with interest rates pinned at zero have excess unemployment.
That was true in the Great Depression, it's been true in Japan for a while, and
it's true now in the US. So it seems appropriate that a model generate some kind
of a low-employment equilibrium. Earlier work on this branch of macro model
building including Paul R. Krugman (1998), Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael