But Clarida, Gall, and Gertler (2000) estimated a forward-looking monetary policy reaction
function for the postwar United States economy before and after Volcker's appointment as Fed
Chairman in 1979, and they found substantial differences across periods. They found that interest
rate policy in the Volcker-Greenspan period has been much more sensitive to changes in
expected inflation than in the pre-Volcker period. They then extracted implications of the estimated
rules for the equilibrium properties of inflation and output in a new Keynesian DSGE
model and showed that the Volcker-Greenspan rule is stabilizing, but that the earlier rule was
not. Thomas A. Lubik and Frank Schorfheide (2004) estimated a new Keynesian model like
Clarida et al.'s in which the equilibrium is undetermined if monetary policy is passive. They constructed
posterior weights for the determinacy and indeterminacy region of the parameter space,
as well as estimates for the propagation of fundamental and sunspot shocks. They found that US
monetary policy after 1982 was consistent with determinacy, but that the pre-Volcker policy was
not, and also that before 1979 indeterminacy substantially altered the propagation of shocks.
In contrast, working in terms of less completely interpreted models, Sims and Zha (2006)
estimated a multivariate regime-switching model for monetary policy and found that the best fit
allows time variation in disturbance variances only. When they permitted the systematic VAR
coefficients to change, the best fit was with change only in the monetary policy rule. They estimated
three regimes that correspond to periods across which the folk-wisdom states that monetary
policy differed. But they found that those differences among regimes were not large enough
to account for the rise and decline of inflation of the 1970s and 1980s. Likewise, by estimating
a time-varying VAR with stochastic volatility, Primiceri (2005) found that both the systematic
and nonsystematic components of monetary policy had changed. In particular, he found that
the systematic responses of the interest rate to inflation and unemployment exhibited a trend
toward more aggressive behavior, while also having sizeable high frequency oscillations. But
Primiceri concluded that those had small effects on the rest of the economy and that exogenous