II. Narratives as Creative, Essentially Human, Works
Predicting the success of creative works with the public is an extremely difficult
task, one that is fundamentally related to the challenge we have in predicting contagion
rates of narratives, processes that depend on many factors. We don't precisely
observe the mental and social processes that create contagion. For example, predicting
the success of motion pictures before they are released is widely known to be
quite difficult (Litman 1983). Jack Valenti, former president of the Motion Picture
Association of America, said
With all the experience, with all the creative instincts of the wisest people
in our business, no one, absolutely no one can tell you what a movie is
going to do in the marketplace... Not until the film opens in a darkened
theater and sparks fly up between the screen and the audience can you say
this film is rightBy
analogy, the reason that writers pull quotes, especially paragraph-length quotes,
and display them as I have just done is often to convey a narrative, to give the reader
a historical sense of a past narrative that had impact and might again have impact on
the reader if it is repeated just as it was perfectly worded. As with jokes, a narrative
has to be delivered just right to be effective. Similarly, with music we want to hear
again and again a performance that sounds exactly right and by the perfect performer.
This is why narratives are difficult to study, and why there are limitations in textual
analysis involving word counts or n-gram counts to quantify and study them.
Since around the beginning of the twentieth century, scholars from a wide array
of disciplines began to think that narratives, stories that seem outwardly to be of
entertainment value only, are really central to human thinking and motivation. For
example, in 1938 the existentialist philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre wrote
A man is always a teller of tales, he lives surrounded by his stories and
the stories of others, he sees everything that happens to him through them;
and he tries to live his life as if he were recounting it
The tales tend to have human interest, if only suggested. By analogy, when asleep
at night, narratives appear to us in the form of dreams. We do not dream of equations
or geometric figures without some human element. Neuroscientists have described
dreaming, which involves characters, settings, and a hierarchical event structure,
as a story-telling instinct that resembles in brain activity a form of spontaneous
confabulation caused by lesions of the anterior limbic system and its subcortical
connections (Pace-Schott 2013).
Anthropologists, who conduct research on the behavior of diverse tribes around
the world, have observed a "universal" that people "use narrative to explain how
things came to be and to tell stories" (Brown 1991). Visitors to any human society
will observe people facing each other, sitting around the television - or the
campfire - together, and vocalizing, and more recently, tweeting, stories, at the
same time waiting to learn other's reactions, interested in feedback that will