productivity growth raise the full-employment marginal product of capital back to
the level of the fixed real wage.
Data on business capital show no decline around 2008. Thus Shimer's model in its
stated form does not explain the current slump unless there has been a decline in the
effective capital stock not captured in the standard data. My assumption of declining
utilization of the capital stock would have that effect. At the end of the paper he
suggests another approach that might have this implication.
Shimer's model differs from the one developed here mainly in its lack of concern
with the decline of the safe short-term nominal interest rate to zero during the current
US slump and in other slumps, such as the one that began 20 years ago in Japan.
An extension of his model to this topic would require adding features that deal with
the nominal interest rate. The assumption of a competitive output market, together
with almost any standard specification of the determination of the price level, would
probably imply that the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate does not matter.
The reason is that, in flexible-price monetary models, the immediate effect of an
adverse shock is a discontinuous drop in the price level followed by a gradual rise.
The expected rate of inflation rises the moment the shock hits. Thus the nominal
interest rate rises and the lower bound of zero is irrelevant.
Adding sticky inflation to Shimer's model would also require the model to take
a stand on what happens when the intertemporal output market has excess current
supply. The simplest answer?embodied in Krugman (1998) and Christiano et al.
(2009)?is that the quantity transacted is the amount demanded. When combined
with the assumption of a fixed real wage, this results in a model that accounts nicely
for slumps. It is a fairly close cousin of the model developed here, which differs
mainly in its addition of a DMP-style model of the labor market.
XI. How Keynesian Is the ModelModern
macroeconomics views John Maynard Keynes as one of the major contributors
to current thinking, along with others, including Robert Solow, Milton
Friedman, Franco Modigliani, James Tobin, and Robert Lucas. I still have and
read the copy of the General Theory that I bought in 1962. By far Keynes's most
important contribution to macroeconomic modeling was his insistence that unemployment
be a central element of our thinking about the business cycle. Keynes
successfully disputed the notion that market clearing describes the labor market.
The reigning theory of the labor market in macroeconomics today, created by Peter
Diamond, Dale Mortensen, and Christopher Pissarides (Mortensen and Pissarides
1994), replaces the cleared labor market with sequences of idiosyncratic transactions
between workers and employers. Unemployment arises because job-seekers
have to wait until they are able to make a transaction.
Keynes embodied his approach to modeling unemployment in a concept called
aggregate demand. Although schools of thought are unimportant in macroeconomics
today, macroeconomists do fall into two camps. One disregards aggregate
demand and builds models that may or may not include unemployment. The other
thinks that aggregate demand is really important, but does not try to formalize it. A
group in the middle?including me?thinks that Keynes was onto something, but
that it's better to build fully specified models that try to get to the underlying issues