changes in term premiums arising from the portfolio balance channel, if they influ-
ence the economic outlook, will also affect expectations of future short rates.
If QE successfully reduces  longer-term interest rates, through either portfolio bal-
ance or signaling channels, then the presumption is that the economy will respond
much in the same way that it does to conventional monetary easing, as a lower cost
of capital, higher wealth, a weaker currency, and stronger balance sheets increase
spending on domestic goods and services.
QE Event Studies: Some Initial Evidence.—Did  post-crisis QE work, in the sense
of meaningfully affecting broad financial conditions? Early QE announcements, at
least, appeared to have substantial market impacts across a wide range of financial
assets. This fact is  well documented by event studies, which look at asset price
changes in narrow time windows around QE announcements.
An illustrative event study for the Fed’s QE1 program is shown in Table 1, which
reports the changes in key asset prices and yields summed over five days, identified
by Gagnon et al. (2011), on which important information bearing on QE1 became
public.6 Evidently, QE1 had powerful announcement effects, including a full per -
centage point decline in the yield on  10-year Treasuries and more than a percent-
age point decline in the yields on  mortgage-backed securities. Qualitatively, these
results hold up well for different choices of event days or for shorter or longer event
windows. Similar  event-study results are obtained for the introduction of QE, at
about the same time, by the Bank of England (Joyce et al. 2011).
The strong market reactions to the initial rounds of QE encouraged policymakers
at the time, and they should refute strong claims that central bank asset purchases
are neutral. However, critics have made two rejoinders to the  event-study evidence.7
First, in contrast to the results shown in Table  1 for QE1, event studies of later
rounds of quantitative easing have tended to find much less dramatic effects. For
example, Krishnamurthy and  Vissing-Jorgenson (2011) looked at the market reac-
tions associated with the introduction of QE2, the second round of US quantitative
easing. Using two identified announcement days and  one-day event windows, they
6 Gagnon et al. (2011) also considered a larger set of eight announcement days. Using the larger set leaves the
results of Table 1 essentially unchanged.
7 See, e.g., Greenlaw et al. (2018). The reply to their paper by Gagnon (2018) anticipates some points I make
here.Table 1—Responses of Asset Prices and Yields
to QE1 Announcements
2-year Treasuries −57
10-year Treasuries −100
30-year Treasuries −58
Mortgage-backed securities −129
AAA corporate bonds −89
SP500 index2.30
Notes:  One-day responses, summed over five announcement dates identi-
fied by Gagnon et al. (2011). Yield changes are in basis points, stock price
changes are in percentage points.
Source: Author’s calculations