In principle, properly constructed measures of the real wage would provide com
parisons across places and over time, and their differences and movements would
provide the opportunity to measure the effects of public policies and to test many
types of economic models. Analyses that make use of real wages range from studies
of economic growth and output accounting (Prescott 1998; Hall and Jones 1999),
to international trade and finance (Eaton and Kortum 2002; Trefler 1993; Rogoff
1996), to the study of migration (Hendricks 2002; Rosenzweig 2010) and inequality
(Deaton 2010), and to problems of political economy (Rodrik 1999).

Despite their obvious usefulness, there is general agreement that the absence of
comprehensive measures of real wage rates is one of the most serious gaps in our
evolving system of economic measurement. One of the few efforts to remedy this
situation was Freeman and Oostendorp's (2000) attempt to standardize the data
collected by the International Labor Organization (ILO). These October Inquiry
data, collected since 1924, are provided by individual countries, but without any
serious effort at standardization. As Freeman and Oostendorp (2000, p. 5) observe,
"Recorded wages are not directly comparable across countries, in the same country
over time, or even among occupations in a country at a point in time, in part because
countries report data from differing national sources rather than conducting special
surveys to answer the ILO request." Their conclusion? "... the Inquiry data has so
many problems that the survey is one of the least widely used sources of cross
country data in the world."

This situation stands m sharp contrast with the progress that has been made in
comparing international prices through the International Comparison Project (ICP).
The ICP was initially started by the United Nations Statistical Division with the
University of Pennsylvania, but it is now housed in the World Bank. It seems appar
ent that it is far past the time when similar progress should be made in the measure
ment of wage data.

In this paper I provide some preliminary analysis of my own attempt to measure
wage rates for comparable workers doing the same tasks in different places and at
different times. My goal is to show just how useful a credible, transparent measure
of the wage rate can be for economic analysis. The data I use come from an orga
nization that is famous for producing the same product in different places and it
has done so for many decades using a known production technology. The workers
are thus using identical skills, using identical technology, and producing the same
product. I am, of course speaking of workers at McDonald's restaurants, and their
famous product, the Big Mac.

I begin by using some historical examples to show how important the measure
ment of real wages is for our understanding of economic progress. I then provide
the basic economic analysis that underlies the conceptual apparatus for the measure
ment of real wages. This leads me to a summary exploration of the data on crew
member wage rates at McDonalds ( "Mc Wages") that I have collected over the last
decade. The discussion proceeds in three parts. First, I provide some detail on how
the data are collected and how they compare to the data for a more limited set of
countries that we have available from the ILO and the US Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS). Second, I provide summary measures by broad economic regions of the

level of wage rates worldwide in 2007, a year I take to be normal by comparison
with the period since. Finally, I explore the path that wage rates have taken in the