rates with a slower rate of asset purchases than in the prior ( quantity-based QE)
regime, reducing concerns about whether there are enough JGBs available for the
BOJ to buy. Yield curve control, besides providing the ability to target financial condition
more precisely, thereby also appears—in the Japanese context, at least—to be
more sustainable.

Clearly, novel monetary policy options extend beyond QE and forward guidance.
Will the Federal Reserve ever adopt any of these supplementary tools? Other than
GSE-backed mortgages, the Fed does not have the authority to buy private assets,
except under limited emergency conditions, and—in light of the political risks and
philosophical objections by some FOMC participants—seems unlikely to request
the authority. A program targeting bank lending, such as the Bank of England’s
Funding-for-Lending Scheme or the ECB’s targeted refinancing operations, is
conceivable and was indeed discussed at the Fed during the  post-crisis period. At
the time, though, FOMC participants did not believe that bank liquidity was constraining
lending, and there were some reservations about the  quasi-fiscal and credit
allocation aspects of subsidizing bank loans. Freeing up bank lending is also macroeconomically
more consequential in jurisdictions like the euro area and Japan

where the bulk of credit flows through banks, as opposed to securities markets. Still,
one can imagine circumstances—for example, if constraints on bank lending are
interfering with the transmission of monetary policy—in which this option might
resurface in the United States.

Federal Reserve officials believe that they have the authority to impose negative
short-term rates (by charging a fee on bank reserves)  but have shown little appetite for
negative rates thus far because of the practical limits on how negative rates can go and
because of possible financial side effects. That said, categorically ruling out negative
rates is probably unwise, as future situations in which the extra policy space provided
by negative rates could be useful are certainly possible. Moreover, theory and empirical
evidence suggest that ruling out negative  short-term rates reduces the ability of the
central bank to influence  longer-term rates near the lower bound, through QE or other
means (Grisse, Krogstrup, and Schumacher 2017) . Maintaining at least some constructive
ambiguity about the possibility of negative policy rates thus seems desirable.
Yield curve control in the Japanese style—that is, pegging or capping very

long-term yields—is probably not feasible, or at least not advisable, in the United
States, given the depth and liquidity of US government securities markets. If
long-term yields were pegged, and market participants came to believe that the future
path of policy rates was likely higher than the targeted yield, the Fed might need to
buy a large share of the outstanding bonds to try to enforce the peg. Those purchases
in turn would flood the banking system with reserves and expose the central bank
to large capital losses. However, pegging Treasury yields at a shorter horizon, say
two years, would likely be feasible and might prove a powerful method for reinforcing
forward rate guidance. Board staff analyzed this possibility in 2010 (Bowman,
Erceg, and Leahy 2010) and it has been recently raised by Brainard (2019).

D. Costs and Risks of the New Policy Tools

The appropriate use of new policy tools depends not only on their benefits but
on their potential costs and risks. I briefly discuss here the potential cos