A deeper response to this argument turns on the distinction between two views
of how QE works, the  so-called stock and flow views. The standard portfolio bal-
ance channel of QE, recall, holds that policymakers can affect  longer-term yields by
changing the relative supplies—that is, the stocks outstanding—of various financial
assets. In this stock view of QE, the effect of asset purchases on yields at each point
in time depends on the accumulated stock of central bank purchases and (because
asset markets are  forward-looking) on expected stocks of central bank holdings at
all future dates. The alternative flow view holds that the current pace of purchases is
the critical determinant of asset prices and yields. This view implicitly underlies the
argument that the effectiveness of QE can be evaluated by looking at the behavior of
longer-term yields during periods of active  central-bank purchases. The flow view
would be correct if QE affected asset prices and yields primarily through  short-run
liquidity effects.
However, the stock view conforms better to the underlying theory and has bet-
ter empirical support (D’Amico and King 2013). Substantial research has tried to
quantify the dynamic relationship between yields and the relative supplies of secu-
rities under the stock view. In an important article, Ihrig et al. (2018) estimated
an  arbitrage-free model of the term structure of Treasury yields, in which current
and expected holdings of securities by the Fed are allowed to influence yields.11
They carefully modeled the evolution of the Fed’s balance sheet, given its purchases
and the maturing of existing securities, and they developed reasonable measures of
market expectations of future purchases. They also incorporated estimates of new
Treasury debt issuance, which partially offset the effects of the Fed’s purchases on
the net supply of government debt (Greenwood et al. 2014).
Putting these elements together, Ihrig et al. (2018) found significant effects of
the Fed’s asset purchase programs on Treasury yields. For example, their estimates
suggest that, at inception, QE1 reduced the  10-year term premium by 34 basis
points, the Maturity Extension Program reduced term premiums by an additional
28 basis points, and QE3 reduced term premiums yet more, by 31 basis points on
announcement and more over time. This finding is consistent with other papers that
show no reduction in the effectiveness of later programs relative to the earliest ones.
Their results also imply substantial persistence: although the effect of any given
QE program decayed over time, as securities matured and ran off the Fed’s balance
sheet, Ihrig et al. (2018) estimated that the cumulative effect of the purchases on
the  10-year yield exceeded 120 basis points when net purchases ended in October
2014 and was still about 100 basis points as of the end of 2015. In related work, Wu
(2014) found quite similar results, crediting Fed asset purchases with more than half
of the 217 basis point decline in  10-year Treasury yields between the Lehman failure
and the taper tantrum. Altavilla, Carboni, and Motto (2015) and Eser et al. (2019)
estimated related models for the euro area, likewise finding that ECB purchases had
sizable and persistent impacts on asset prices—notwithstanding, once again, that the
ECB’s program was announced at a time of low financial distress.
11 For a summary of this approach and its findings, see Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei (2017). This work builds on Li and
Wei (2013) and Hamilton and Wu (2012), the latter of whom find somewhat weaker effects of asset purchases. A
number of papers use regression methods to assess the effects of bond supply on term premiums, e.g., Gagnon et
al. (2011); the line of research typified by Ihrig et al. (2018) can be seen as an attempt to impose greater structure
(including the  no-arbitrage condition) on this approach. See also Greenwood and Vayanos (2014).