the regions?are known to have been ad hoc and unsatisfactory. I shall focus on the 2005 round,
and discuss and quantify the effects of several aspects of the way the indexes were constructed.
Figure 3 shows the revisions to the PPPs in relation to country living standards; it displays
the ratio of new to old GDP PPPs for 2005 taken from the 2008 and 2007 World Development
Indicators, respectively. A similar graph for the consumption PPPs is given in Ravallion, Chen
and Sangraula (2009, Figure 4). Figure 3 shows a strong negative relationship between the upward
revision in the PPP for GDP, on the vertical axis, and log GDP per capita on the horizontal axis,
which implies that the GDP per capita in international dollars tended to be revised downward in
poor countries relative to rich countries, which is why inequality increased. (The negative rela
tionship would be even steeper using the old estimates of per capita GDP, according to which the
poorest countries were richer than shown.) Relative to the rich countries, poor countries became
poorer; this does not affect global poverty given that global poverty is assessed by poor world
standards?but it does increase the estimate of global inequality (and reduce the value of the
global poverty line below its value if updated by the US CPI). The figure also shows that the larg
est revisions are in Africa and Asia; the average ratios of new to old are 1.42 for Africa and 1.33
for Asia-Pacific. The largest seven revisions are in Africa, and there are 18 African countries in
the top 25, the others being Cambodia, Nepal, Bangladesh, Philippines, China, Tonga, and Fiji;
all except Tonga (which was not benchmarked in the 2005 ICP, but was imputed) are in the Asia
Pacific region. Since Africa and Asia were linked to the other regions using regional PPPs?one
for each region, calculated from the ring using Diewert's method?these regional PPPs are a
natural point of investigation for investigating the increase in inequality. By the same token,
measures of world inequality are sensitive to these regional PPPs; for example, if the revision to
the regional PPPs for Africa and Asia-Pacific had been half their actual size, so that the ratios
were 1.21 and 1.165 rather than 1.42 and 1.33, half the difference in the standard deviation of logs
in per capita GDP would disappear. Without the upward revisions to the African and Asia-Pacific
PPPs, there would have been no increase in measured inequality.

The 2005 ICP has price data for 146 countries, many of which were imputed in earlier rounds,
either by comparison with countries at a similar level of development, or by updating old data, or
some combination of the two. For countries without benchmarks, the PPP correction factor, the
ratio of PPP to exchange rates, is imputed from a regression of the logarithm of the correction
factor on the logarithm of per capita GDP at market prices. (Other variables are also included;
see Changqing Sun and Eric Swanson 2009 and Deaton and Heston 2010 for more details.)
These imputations target the logarithm of PPP, or equivalently the logarithm of per capita GDP
in international dollars, and deliver unbiased estimates in ideal conditions. However, the imputed
values will have fewer cross-country variations than the unobserved true values. If \npy is the
logarithm of the price of GDP?the ratio of the PPP to the average exchange rate?the regression
for imputation in its simplest form is

where yA is per capita GDP in US dollars converted at market exchange rates; using the World
Development Indicators, 8X is typically estimated to be around 0.25. Imputed per capita GDP in
international prices is  A. Country Coverage, Imputations, and Inequality
