Importantly for this purpose, FRB/ US and similar models include rich descriptions of
the financial sector and the linkages between financial conditions and the real econ-
omy. Given estimates of the financial effects of new policy tools, these models can
therefore be used to trace out the expected macroeconomic consequences of their use.
For example, Reifschneider ( 2016)  used FRB/ US simulations to evaluate the
ability of the Fed to respond to a hypothetical severe recession. He found that,
assuming a nominal neutral interest rate of 3 percent, a combination of forward
guidance and QE could provide enough stimulus to substantially offset the effects
of the lower bound. Chung et al. ( 2019) , also using FRB/ US simulations and
studying a similar scenario, were somewhat more pessimistic, finding that for -
ward guidance and QE would be “modestly effective” in promoting recovery and
returning inflation to target but would do little to limit the initial rise in unem-
ployment in a severe recession. The differences in their results appear to be due to
more conservative assumptions by Chung et al. ( 2019)  about the effects of asset
purchases on rates, as well as assumptions about initial conditions, the baseline
policy rule, and expectations formation that differ from some other papers in this
literature. Their finding that the new monetary tools would do little to limit the ini-
tial rise in unemployment following a severe recessionary shock seems largely to
reflect estimated lags of monetary policy, traditional or nontraditional. The exis-
tence of these lags provides an argument for  more proactive policies, and perhaps
for policy frameworks that lead financial market participants and others to under -
stand in advance that policymakers will respond aggressively when the short rate
hits the lower bound.
An alternative approach to using FRB/US to study a single historical episode or
hypothetical scenario is to use the model to simulate the  long-run behavior of the US
economy under differing policy rules or frameworks, with shocks drawn from the
historical distribution of model residuals. Because they allow researchers to study
the performance of alternative policies under a realistic mix of shocks, including the
possibility that adverse shocks may hit an economy already in recession,  so-called
stochastic simulations arguably provide more robust assessments of policy alterna-
tives. Studying the  long-run behavior of the model, as opposed to simulating the
“next recession,” is also more useful from the perspective of choosing among policy
frameworks or toolkits, which once decided upon are likely to remain in place for
an extended period.
Kiley and Roberts ( 2017)  and Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019)  used sto-
chastic simulations in FRB/ US to study the performance of alternative mone-
tary policy rules and frameworks near the lower bound. However, neither of these
papers considered central bank asset purchases. Kiley ( 2018)  remedied this omis-
sion, using FRB/ US simulations to study the effects of the systematic use of QE
(without forward guidance) . He considered Fed balance sheet rules of varying
aggressiveness, in which the quantity of assets purchased after the policy rate
hits zero is tied to the estimated output gap. For a nominal neutral interest rate of
3 percent, he found that QE programs can overcome a significant portion of the
effects of the lower bound. Chung et al. ( 2019) , mentioned above, also conducted
stochastic simulations that included asset purchases, incorporating anticipatory
effects of future purchases. As noted, their work finds somewhat more modest
effects of QE