recommendation. Ricardo proposed that a country's domestic money supply should ideally consist
 of paper notes that the government promises to exchange at a pegged price for gold bullion
bars, but that no gold coins should actually be minted. A variant of Ricardo's scheme in which a
government promises to redeem domestic notes for gold, but only for foreign residents, came to
be practiced around 1900. This arrangement, by which "a cheap local currency [is] artificially
maintained at par with the international standard of value" (Keynes 1913, 25), was called the
"gold exchange standard." Keynes described how by 1913 this system had come to prevail in India
through a sequence of haphazard administrative decisions that eventually produced a coherent
system that no one had planned, but that Keynes applauded. Keynes (1913, 25) predicted that
Ricardo's scheme would be an essential part of "the ideal currency system of the future."54
The standard formula eliminates the gold or silver points for all but one standard coin, uses the
mint and meit points for that coin to regulate the total quantity of money, and promises freely to
convert tokens into that standard coin in order to produce the correct denomination composition.
It was one more step from the standard formula or Ricardo's proposal to the recommendation of
Fisher (1920), Keynes, and others that well-intentioned government officials, not the mint and
meit points for a standard coin, should regulate the supply of money. Discovering the quantity
theory of money was an essential step in learning the conditions under which a flat money system
 could be managed to provide greater price level stability than could be achieved with a gold
standard.
As Keynes wanted, in the twentieth century, governments throughout the world carried out
the historically unprecedented experiment of managing currencies completely cut off from gold
backing (see Friedman 1992, 245). Figure 5 documents that, at least until very recently, the monetary
 authorities in four hard-currency countries failed to deliver the kind of price stability that a
commodity standard had achieved. There was much more inflation in many other countries.
C. A Monetary Policy Rules Literature
The adaptive models described in Section VI explain the rise and fall of post-World War II
US inflation in terms of monetary policy rules that drifted in response to drifts in the monetary
authorities' models of the economy. All three models embed very crude descriptions of the monetary
 policy rules and sidestep many interesting questions about monetary policy transmission
mechanisms. It is appropriate to say a few words about a related literature that uses time series
data to infer the structure of postwar US monetary policy rules and how they have changed over
time. The bottom line is that this literature has mixed evidence about whether monetary policy
rules shifted enough to validate stories along the lines of our three adaptive models.55
Bernanke and Ilian Mihov (1998) developed an SVAR methodology for measuring innovations
 in monetary policy and their macroeconomic effects. They compared alternative ways of
measuring monetary policy shocks and derived a new measure of policy innovations based on
possibly time-varying estimates of the Fed's operating procedures. They presented a measure of
the overall stance of policy (see Bernanke and Mihov 1998, fig. III, 899) that is striking in how
the distribution of tight and loose policies seem not to have changed much in the periods before  and after 1980.