(1997) and O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999). In these models delta is the standard
exponential discount rate and beta measures short-term impatience. The standard
model is just the special case in which beta is 1 .0. The beta-delta model is a good
example of what Rabin (2013) calls PEEMs, which stands for "portable extensions
of existing models." The ease with which economists can incorporate such models
into an otherwise standard analysis has obvious appeal.
Along with intertemporal choice, the important aspect of preferences that has
received a lot of attention from behavioral economic theorists is "other-regarding
preferences." These models were all stimulated by empirical findings showing that
humans are not completely selfish, even to strangers. For example, in one-shot pris-
oners' dilemma games about 40-50 percent of subjects cooperate, both in labora-
tory experiments and even in a game show environment where the stakes are over
£10,000 (van den Assem, van Dolder, and Thaler 2012). Similarly, people cooperate
in public goods environments when the rational selfish strategy is to give nothing.
The most prominent models in this space are by Rabin ( 1993) and Fehr and Schmidt
(1999). The easiest way to summarize this literature is to say that Humans are nicer
and more mannerly than Econs. Specifically, their first instinct is to cooperate as
long as they expect others to do likewise.
B. Behavioral Beliefs
When people make choices they do so based on a set of expectations about the
consequences of their choices and the many exogenous factors that can determine
how the future will evolve. Traditionally, economists assume that such beliefs are
unbiased. Although the rational expectations hypothesis as first formulated by Muth
(1961) and elaborated upon by Lucas (1976) and many others is often considered
to be a specific approach to economic modeling, especially in macroeconomics, I
think it is fair to say that the essential idea is entirely mainstream. The assumption
of rational expectations makes explicit an idea that is commonplace in economic
theory, namely that agents act as if they understood the model (and state-of-the-art
econometrics techniques as well). Whether this assumption is empirically valid is
another question.
Explicit tests of rational expectations per se are uncommon because we rarely
observe or elicit actual expectations data. When we do, we often find that actual
expectations diverge from what would reasonably be called rational. For exam-
ple, Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) find that homeowners during the period
of rapidly rising prices from 2000-2005 expected home prices to continue to rise
at double-digit rates for the next decade. While one can't prove such expectations
were irrational, they certainly seem excessively optimistic, both ex ante and ex post.
Furthermore, in this domain and in many others, expectations seem to rely too much
on extrapolation of recent trends. To a first approximation, people expect that what
goes up will continue to go up.
We also see violations of rational expectations in the predictions of stock mar-
ket returns by chief financial officers studied by Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey
(2013). The CFOs were asked to predict one-year rates of return on the S&P 500
and also give 80 percent confidence limits. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the CFOs had
essentially no ability to predict returns in the stock market. What is more di