after five years, a 30 log point difference in annual earnings develops and at 10 to
16 years after the MBA, the gender gap in earnings grows to 60 log points (that is,
women earn 55 percent what men do). Three factors explain 84 percent of the gap.
Training prior to MBA receipt, (e.g., finance courses, GPA) accounts for 24 percent.
Career interruptions and job experience account for 30 percent, and differences in
weekly hours are the remaining 30 percent. Importantly, about two-thirds of the total
penalty from job interruptions is due to taking any time out.
At 10 to 16 years from MBA receipt, 23 percent of University of Chicago Booth
School MBA women who are in the labor force work part-time and, interestingly,
more than half of those working part-time employ themselves. Around 17 percent
are not currently employed and 60 percent work full-time (5 1 percent do of those
with children). Cumulative time not working is about one year for all women 10 to
16 years after the MBA.
Not surprisingly, children are the main contributors to women's labor supply
changes. Women with children work 24 percent fewer hours per week than men or
than women without children. The impact of children on female labor supply dif-
fers strongly by spousal income. MBA moms with high-earning spouses have labor
force rates that are 18.5 percentage points lower than those with lesser-earnings
spouses.38 They work 19 percent fewer hours per week (when working) than those
with spouses below the high-income level. The impact of higher income husbands
may be a pure income effect but it more likely results from a combination of an
income and a substitution effect in which the family requires some parental home
time and the high-flyer husband offers little.39
Another important result is that the impact of a birth on labor supply grows over
time in an individual, fixed-effects estimation. A year after a first birth, women's
hours, conditional on working, are reduced by 17 percent and their participation by
13 percentage points. But three to four years later, hours decline by 24 percent and
participation by 18 percentage points. Some MBA moms try to stay in the fast lane
but ultimately find it is unworkable. The increased impact years after the first birth,
moreover, is not due to the effect of additional births.
Part-time work in the corporate sector is uncommon and part-timers are often
self-employed (more than half are at 10 to 16 years out). Differences in career inter-
ruptions and hours worked by sex are not large, but the corporate and financial sec-
tors impose heavy penalties on deviation from the norm. Some female MBAs with
children, especially those with high earning husbands, find the trade-offs too steep
and leave or engage in self-employment.
In sum, the appeal of an MBA for women is large - incomes are substantial even
if they are far lower than those of their male peers. But some women with children
find the inflexibility of the work insurmoun