share in Africa?although not in Asia?so that their contribution to the regional PPP is being
driven by the share in the OECD, not the share in Africa. That pharmaceuticals and motor cars
are more or less offset by housing in Africa hardly builds confidence in the numbers, though
it is hard to see any evidence in Table 6 that would support the idea that prices in Africa are
systematically overstated. The large influence of housing in Asia seems much harder to justify.
Table 6 does not deliver any obvious culprit whose adjustment would have a large effect on
global consumption inequality, though it does demonstrate the fragility of the estimates. For
example, if we were to scale up all countries in Asia-Pacific by 5.9 percent?corresponding
to the assumption that the rental parity is the same as in the OECD?the population weighted
international (Concept 2) Gini coefficient falls from 0.543 to 0.537, a substantial shift, but small
relative to the change between the two rounds of the ICP. A 5.9 percent boost to all countries
in the African region delivers even less, reducing the Gini from 0.543 to 0.542. However, when
we assess the overall uncertainty about inequality, there are a number of other factors that need
to be taken into account, particularly concerning China and India. China collected only urban
or peri-urban prices, and Deaton and Heston, forthcoming, argue that it would be reasonable
to increase Chinese GDP by 10 percent on these grounds alone; indeed, both the World Bank's
most recent poverty calculations and those by Deaton and Dupriez make a similar correction.
There is a conceptually similar, although smaller, urban bias in the prices collected in India. It
also turns out that if we replace the ICP calculations by a single global multilateral calculation
using the basic heading prices from the ICP, both Indian and Chinese GDP are increased by six
percent. If we make a rough correction for all of these issues, raising Asia/Pacific and Africa by
5.9 percent, then China by 20 percent (urban bias plus single bias from regional calculation), and
India by 15 percent (same reasons as China), the Gini coefficient falls from 0.543 to 0.524. These
calculations are for GDP; some of the corrections would have smaller effects for consumption,
and some larger.
The calculation in which all the corrections are done independently probably overstates the
uncertainty about the Gini coefficient, although I find it hard to feel confident about even that.
Yet earlier work by Albert Berry, Bourguignon, and Morrison (1983) also showed that Gini
coefficients were quite insensitive to choice of international prices, so it is possible that the large
change in measured inequality in the 2005 round does not come from any deficiency in the
latest ICP. Still, the uncertainties in Table 6 are disconcerting, particularly because they move
whole continents, as are the theoretical and empirical uncertainties about quality correction and
weighting that emerge from both Tables 5 and 6. What is disconcerting is not the inability to find
a cause or group of causes for the increase in measured inequality, but rather the sense that all
of the intercontinental comparisons are fragile and can easily be disturbed by factors that we do  not know how to handle.
V. Why Don't We Just Ask PeopleI
now return to the main theme, the question of poverty measurement. My investigation of the
ICP has shown that there are a number of ICP related questions about the poverty counts. But
uncertainty about PPPs is not the only source of sensitivity in poverty measures. The national
poverty lines are treated as precise cut-offs, but the discussions that lead to them could some
times be better characterized as specifying only a range of answers. At least some of the poverty
lines from the poorest countries owe little to well-informed local democratic discussions, but
are set using standard technical rules based on the expenditure levels at which households typi
cally meet expert-specified nutritional norms. Such lines have many conceptual problems?for
example, if people do less heavy labor as they become better off, they may need fewer calories,
which would lead to an increase in a poverty line defined as the level of expenditure at which