Operations. Unlike  crisis-era programs aimed at stemming the financial panic, these
lending programs were aimed at broader economic stabilization, by overcoming
lending bottlenecks in  bank-dominated economies and, more generally, by offering
bank-dependent borrowers the same access to credit as borrowers with access to
securities markets. Most of the available evidence on these programs suggests that
they lowered bank funding costs, promoted lending, and improved monetary policy
pass-through to the real economy (Andrade et al. 2019; Churm et al. 2018; Cahn,
Matheron, and Sahuc 2017). However, the efficacy of these programs seems likely
to depend in a complicated way on the health of the banking system: if banks are
well-capitalized, then their need for cheap liquidity from the central bank may be
limited. Conversely, if banks are short of capital, their lending may be constrained
or their incentives to make good loans distorted, notwithstanding the availability of
low-cost funding.
Third, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the central banks of several smaller
European countries adopted negative  short-term interest rates, enforced by a charge
on bank reserves. The ability of the public to substitute into cash, which pays a
zero nominal rate, or to  prepay nominal liabilities such as taxes, limits how far into
negative territory the short rate can fall. Negative rates also raise financial stability
concerns. One risk is that bank capital and lending capacity will be impaired by
negative rates, because in practice banks cannot easily pass negative rates on to
retail depositors. Indeed, a “reversal rate” of interest may exist, below which the
adverse effects of the negative rate on bank capital and lending make it economically
contractionary on net (Brunnermeier and Koby 2017). However, central banks
can address the reversal rate problem through various devices, such as paying a
higher rate to banks on a portion of their reserves (tiering), as has been done by the
BOJ and the ECB. In addition, when rates decline, banks benefit from the upward
revaluation of their assets and from improvements in overall economic conditions,
which reduce credit losses.
Within the limited range so far experienced, negative policy rates appear to have
been passed through to bank lending rates, money market rates, and  longer-term
interest rates (Arteta et al. 2018, Hartmann and Smets 2018). An International
Monetary Fund (2017) review summed up by saying, “Experience is limited, but so
far [negative interest rate policies] appear to have had positive, albeit likely small,
effects on domestic monetary conditions, with no major internal side effects on bank
profits, payment systems, or market functioning.” The evidently moderate costs and
benefits of negative rates seem disproportionate to the rhetorical heat they stimulate
in some quarters. Money illusion can be powerful.
Finally, the Bank of Japan in September 2016 initiated a program of “yield curve
control,” a framework which includes a peg for the  short-term interest rate (as in
traditional policymaking) but also a target range for the yield on  10-year Japanese
government bonds (JGBs), enforced by purchases of those bonds. Yield curve control
allows the BOJ to provide stimulus by lowering interest rates throughout the
term structure. Yield curve control may be thought of as a form of QE that targets
the price of bonds and leaves the quantity of bonds purchased by the central bank
to be determined endogenously, rather than the reverse as in standard QE programs.
Because the program is credible and because many private holders of JGBs appear
not to be very  price-sensitive, it seems that the BOJ can maintain low  longrates