In addressing the closely related problem of optimal turnover in a model with
a fixed (but unknown) match component, Jovanovich (1979) showed that an equi-
librium contract pays the worker the expected value of her  match-specific produc-
tivity, and allows her to quit when the option value of the current job falls below
the option value of a fresh job.9 Jovanovich’s model has features of the canonical
Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides search model, but incorporates  job-to-job mobility,
leading to something like a “ worker-specific job ladder” as jobs that are revealed
to be worse matches (and therefore have lower pay) are terminated.10 Topel and
Ward (1992) interpreted the patterns of wages and turnover for young male workers
as evidence of this process, but they did not have rich enough data to tell whether
wages include a  match-specific component (as in Jovanovich 1979) or whether
later-career jobs pay higher wages to all workers (as in the  BM model). In my view,
the simple event studies developed by Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) and the
surprisingly small job match component uncovered in that paper (and many later
studies) suggest that workers tend to move up the same job ladder (as in Abowd,
Kramarz, and Margolis 1999).
Finally, there were a few studies of specific institutional settings where firm wage
setting power seemed possible. Sullivan (1989), for example, showed that increases
in the number of nurses were correlated with  hospital-specific wage increases,
suggesting that employers were facing  upward-sloping supply curves for nursing
labor. Ransom (1993) used university payroll data to show that wages of professors
decline with tenure—a pattern he attributed to monopsonistic wage discrimination.
IV . What Happened in the 1990s?
Four new types of evidence have accumulated in the past 25 years that suggest
employer  wage-setting power is  nonnegligible: evidence on quit and recruiting
responses to wages, evidence on the relationship between wages and firm produc-
tivity, evidence on the concentration of employment in small numbers of employers,
and evidence of conspiracies and other forms of firm behavior targeted at suppress-
ing  firm-to-firm mobility and wage growth.
A. Quit, Recruiting, and Application Elasticities
Though many economists acknowledge that quit and recruitment rates vary with
wages, the connection between these responses and the elasticity of supply that is
relevant for a monopsonistic wage setter does not seem to have been fully appre-
ciated until the seminal paper by BM (which circulated for many years prior to its
publication). Card and Krueger (1995) noted that in any steady state, the elasticity
of labor supply is just the sum of the absolute values of the elasticities of recruit-
ing and quitting. Manning (2003) showed that in a simple job ladder model the
two are equal: thus, an analyst can estimate one or the other and double it to yield
9 If  match-specific productivity requires upfront investment, the solution is to have workers pay for the invest-
ment and then follow the Jovanovich rule. This is solution proposed by Crawford (1988). Discussions of such
“bonding” contracts were widespread when I joined the Chicago faculty in 1982.
10 Subsequent studies by Miller (1984) and McCall (1990) used the  multi-arm bandit setup of Gittins and Jones
(1974) to incorporate learning over an  occupation-specific match component as well as a  job-specific component.