may suffer different degrees of loss, and the allocation of losses across creditors
may be uncertain. For example, a minor default may involve a modest delay in
returning principal of a short term debt. Other creditors may be unaffected, or, if
the holder of the short debt goes to court, all debtors may find themselves impaired.
Similar, or perhaps more severe, uncertainties surround sovereign default.

Unanticipated high inflation does impose losses on investors in nominal sover
eign debt, but it does not involve renegotiation or court proceedings. Contracted
payments are made. The securities remain tradable. In the same state of uncertainty
about future primary surpluses, therefore, investors are likely to be much more
uncertain about the return on their own investment in sovereign debt when reso
lution of the fiscal imbalance has to come from default, rather than inflation and
nominal interest rate changes.

In a financial panic, counterparty risk becomes pervasive among market partici
pants and credit markets freeze up. An institution of unquestioned soundness and
liquidity can remedy the situation by lending freely. While large private banks can
and have historically sometimes acted as such a lender of last resort, any private
institution that attempts it risks itself becoming subject to worries about liquidity. A
central bank, backed by a treasury that can run primary surpluses and issue nominal
debt, is an ideal lender of last resort. Because it can create reserve money, it need
never default. If it takes capital losses, and it is not backed by a fiscal authority, it
could be forced to run a high inflation to restore its balance sheet, but this will not
be a problem if it has fiscal backing. Europe, in setting up its Monetary Union, did
not contemplate the ECB's taking on a lender of last resort role. Individual country
central banks can no longer play the role, because they have no independent author
ity to create reserve money and their country treasuries issue only real debt. During
the recent crisis the ECB has in fact played a lender of last resort role, though its
effectiveness is limited because its actions and announcements in this role are regu
larly criticized by some northern-tier economic officials.

III. Models

A. Samuelson's Pure Consumption Loan Model with Storage

This model is one where, without tax backing for debt or money, the price level
is indeterminate. The model in that case has one stable price level, in which the
real allocation is efficient, and a continuum of other possible initial price levels,
each of which corresponds to an inefficient equilibrium in which the real value of
government debt or money shrinks toward zero. If the government runs a primary
surplus (revenues in excess of non-interest expenditures), private agents see the
future taxes as reducing their spending power. They will therefore save (attempt
to accumulate money or government debt), until the price level is low enough that
the value of their government paper matches the present value of their future taxes.
This mechanism eliminates the non-uniqueness, no matter how small the primary
surplus, and for small levels of primary surplus, the real allocation is arbitrarily
close to the efficient one.

There is an infinite sequence of periods, in each of which the same number of two
period-lived agents is born and endowed with one unit of the consumption good,