978
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW APRIL 2020
valuable policy space—can no longer fully compensate for the effects of the lower 
bound. Moreover, in that case, any monetary policy approach, with or without the 
new tools, is likely to involve extended periods of short rates at the lower bound, as 
well as  longer-term yields that are often very low or negative, which may pose risks 
to financial stability or impose other costs. Should the neutral rate ultimately prove 
to be that low, then additional measures to increase policy space, including a mod-
erate increase in the inflation target or significantly greater reliance on active fiscal 
policy for economic stabilization, might become necessary. For now, though, major 
changes seem premature. A reasonable interim approach could involve working to 
increase the countercyclicality of fiscal policy, for example, through increased use 
of automatic stabilizers. And, of course, in any case, the Fed must work to keep 
inflation expectations from falling below target, which would bring down the neutral 
interest rate and limit policy space.
I began this lecture by referring to the victory over inflation under Fed chairs 
V olcker and Greenspan, an experience that promoted the view among central bank-
ers that lower inflation is always better. We have come almost full circle: in a world 
in which low nominal neutral rates threaten the capacity of central banks to respond 
to recessions,  too-low inflation can be dangerous. Consistent with their declared 
“symmetric” inflation targets, the Federal Reserve and other central banks should 
defend against inflation that is too low as least as vigorously as they resist inflation 
that is too high.
REFERENCES
Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary Daly, William Wascher, and David Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited: Who 
Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 50 (Spring): 
333–404.
Adrian, Tobias, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench. 2013. “Pricing the Term Structure with 
Linear Regressions.” Journal of Financial Economics 110 (1): 110–38.
Adrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang. 2018. “Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stabil-
ity.” International Journal of Central Banking January: 73–131.
Altavilla, Carlo, Luca Brugnolini, Refet Gürkaynak, Roberto Motto, and Giuseppe Ragusa. 2019. 
“Monetary Policy in Action: Multiple Dimensions of ECB Policy Communication and Their Finan-
cial Market Effects.” Center for Economic Policy Research, VOX .
Altavilla, Carlo, Giacomo Carboni, and Roberto Motto. 2015. “Asset Purchase Programmes and 
Financial Markets: Lessons from the Euro Area.” European Central Bank Working Paper 1864.
Altavilla, Carlo, and Domenico Giannone. 2015. “The Effectiveness of Nonstandard Monetary Pol-
icy Measures: Evidence from Survey Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 752.
Ampudia, Miguel, Dimitris Georgarakos, Jiri Slacalek, Oreste Tristani, Philip Vermeulen, and 
Giovanni Violante. 2018. “Monetary Policy and Household Inequality.” European Central Bank 
Working Paper 2170.
Andrade, Philippe, Christophe Cahn, Henri Fraisse, and Jean-Stéphane Mésonnier. 2019. “Can the 
Provision of Long-Term Liquidity Help to Avoid a Credit Crunch? Evidence from the Eurosystem’s 
LTRO.” Journal of the European Economic Association 17 (4): 1070–1106.
Arteta, Carlos, M. Ayhan Kose, Marc Stocker, and Temel Taskin. 2018. “Implications of Negative 
Interest Rate Policies: An Early Assessment.” Pacific Economic Review 23 (1): 8–26.
Bauer, Michael, and Glenn Rudebusch. 2014. “The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Pur -
chases.” International Journal of Central Banking 10 (3): 233–89.
Bauer, Michael, and Glenn Rudebusch. 2017. “Interest Rates Under Falling Stars.” Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2017-16. 
Bernanke, Ben S. 2020. “Data and code for: The New Tools of Monetary Policy.” American Economic 
Review [publisher], Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. 
http://doi.org/10.3886/E117206V1.