This essay is about some ideas and experiences that shaped Ricardo's proposal to banish precious
metals as money, and other ideas that emerged from the struggles of academic economists
and policymakers to implement and refine what they had learned from Ricardo. I focus
on two sources of prevailing ideas in macroeconomics. One is a collection of powerful theoretical
results and empirical methods described in Sections I, II, and III, which apply the rational
expectations equilibrium concept to estimate models and design optimal macroeconomic
policies intelligently. The other is an adaptive evolutionary process, modelled in Section IV and
illustrated both in Section V, about ideas and events that influenced Ricardo, and in Section VI,
about struggles of the US monetary authorities in the 1970s to realize the promise for improvement
held out by Ricardo.

The rational expectations equilibrium concept equates all subjective distributions with an
objective distribution. By equating subjective distributions for endogenous variables to an equilibrium
distribution implied by a model, the rational expectations hypothesis makes agents'
beliefs disappear as extra components of a theory, and sets up the powerful theoretical results
and intelligent policy design exercises described in Section I. Section II describes theoretical and
practical reasons for equating subjective distributions to an objective one and how it facilitates
the rational expectations econometrics described in Section III.

The assumption that agents share common beliefs underpins influential doctrines about
whether inflation-unemployment dynamics can be exploited by policymakers, the time inconsistency
of benevolent government policy, the capacity of reputation to substitute for commitment,
the incentives for one type of policymaker to emulate another, and the wisdom of making information
public. The common beliefs assumption is especially stressed in those modern theories of
optimal macroeconomic policy that focus on how a benevolent government shapes expectations
optimally. This intelligent design approach to macroeconomic policy perfects an older econometric
policy evaluation method that Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1976) criticized because it imputed