labor force for those with lower income husbands.42 There are, however, almost no
differences among those with no children. Almost none of those women, indepen-
dent of the income of their husbands, is out of the labor force.
Leaving the labor force for women with a JD appears to involve an interaction of
spousal income and the presence of children. The reasons would seem the same as
offered for the MBAs. Children require a modicum of parental time, high-income
husbands provide little of it, and part-time work for JDs is insufficiently remunera-
tive for some to remain employed.
C. Pharmacy: A Linear Occupation
The occupation of pharmacist is an excellent example of one that has fairly linear
earnings with respect to hours worked and a negligible penalty to time out of the
labor force. Managers of pharmacies get paid more because they work more hours.
Female pharmacists with children get paid less because they work fewer hours.
Pharmacists, particularly women, often work part-time. But there is no part-time
penalty.43
Pharmacy is a high income occupation - the eighth highest for men and third
highest for women - that, in recent decades, has required a specialized six-year
combined BS-doctoral degree. I will briefly summarize the findings from a study of
the pharmacy profession by Goldin and Katz (2013) that uses, primarily, data from
the National Pharmacist Workforce Surveys for 2000, 2004, and 2009.
Most pharmacists today work for non-independent retailers, mainly large chains,
or in hospitals - about 75 percent do. But four decades ago around 25 percent were
employed in these sectors. Self-ownership and employment by independent phar-
macies declined greatly in the interim.
At the same time, women have increased their numbers in the profession. They
are now about 55 percent of all active pharmacists and 65 percent of new hires.
Women were always a reasonable fraction of pharmacists. Before the large increase
in retail chain employment, women were often the part-time assistants of male phar-
macists who managed their own pharmacies.
Today the occupation has among the lowest gender earnings gaps among high-
earning occupations. The (unadjusted) ratio of earnings for female to male full-time,
full-year pharmacists is 0.85 whereas it was 0.60 in 1970. The hours-adjusted ratio
is from 0.93 to 0.95.44
Several changes in the pharmacy profession have been responsible for the increase
of female to male earnings. The first is the decrease in self-ownership and the rise
of large corporation and hospital employment. As corporate ownership and hospi-
tal employment increased, the portion of earnings that came from self-employment
decreased. The ratio of the (time-adjusted) earnings of female to male 