Note that market designers are not mostly academics: the design of marketplaces
offers rich rewards to entrepreneurs, who must also experiment to develop, main-
tain, and defend marketplaces that attract wide and steady participation. So market design as an emerging academic discipline not only helps in the design of new mar -
kets and marketplaces, it helps us better understand a large part of the general econ-omy. And markets may be becoming even more important as computerized markets together with mobile computing and communication make marketplaces ever more omnipresent. This is changing the boundaries of firms as more things that firms have traditionally done internally (like record keeping, computing, and logistics) become available through markets.
In conclusion, in honor of its centennial in 1990, the Economic Journal solicited
a set of papers looking into the next 100 years of various parts of economics. I was tasked with looking into the future of game theory. Noting that game theory itself was not yet 50 years old (counting from von Neumann and Morgenstern 1944), I confined myself to looking ahead only 50 years. It seemed to me then that, looking ahead, the prospects were mixed—game theory had delivered important conceptual insights, but if we wanted it to remain a foundation of economics we would have to do more. Here is part of the final paragraph (Roth 1991b):
in the long term, the real test of our success will be not merely how well we
understand the general principles which govern economic interactions, but how well we can bring this knowledge to bear on practical questions of microeconomic engineering… Just as chemical engineers are called upon not merely to understand the principles which govern chemical plants, but to design them, and just as physicians aim not merely to understand the biological causes of disease, but their treatment and prevention, a measure of the success of microeconomics will be the extent to which it becomes the source of practical advice, solidly grounded in well tested theory, on designing the institutions through which we interact with one another.
Rereading today what I wrote almost 30 years ago, I’m glad that we still have 20
years of running room. We’ve already made a little progress, and there’s every reason
to think we can make more. We have begun to understand better and even to play a role in how marketplaces transform markets and sometimes create whole new mar -
kets. Economics is still an early-stage science, and an even earlier-stage engineering discipline. So this is an exciting time to be an economist. There is lots of progress we still need to make, it’s important for the world that we do so, and there are some indications of fruitful paths to follow. I’m looking forward with substantial optimis