IV. Financial Frictions

A financial friction drives a wedge between the returns that savers receive and the
rates that borrowers pay. Agency problems in financial intermediaries are one source
of those frictions. Adverse selection of borrowers is another. The financial crisis
resulted in large declines in the equity values of financial intermediaries, which
substantially worsened the agency problems. Loss of equity among household borrowers
worsened adverse selection.

Robert E. Hall (2010) describes a framework for studying financial frictions and
Hall (forthcoming) gives many details and citations to recent work on this topic. The
framework in those papers shares many elements with the discussion here.

A widely studied setup?see Ben S. Bernanke, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist
(1999)?generates frictions from the agency relationship between investors and
financial intermediaries. See Gertler and Peter Karadi (2009) for an application to
the Great Slump. Investors lack the expertise to invest directly in productive enterprises.
They place their funds with intermediaries who will abscond with some fraction
of the funds unless their continuation values exceed the value of absconding. In
equilibrium, the intermediary charges entrepreneurs more for credit than the amount
paid to investors. The present value of the difference is the needed continuation
value. The present value arises from the spread between the intermediary's lending
and borrowing rates and from the intermediary's equity. The setup has been influential
in the theory of bank regulation, which holds that the value of a bank's franchise
protects depositors and deposit insurers against excessive risk-taking by banks.
When assets held by intermediaries lose value?as from a decline in real-estate
prices?the continuation value threatens to drop below the value from absconding.
To prevent absconding, the investors accept a widening of the spread. Thus the
behavior of credit spreads is central to this theory of variations in financial frictions.