Then (27) becomes

(29) ¿ = (p-0,)¿ +00-02

The three-equation differential equation system formed by (21), (22), and (29) is
recursive, since b appears only in the last equation. That means that the solution
paths that make it explode up or down that we observed when considering the first
two equations alone are still mathematical solution paths for the three-equation sys
tem. But now notice what happens to b along a path on which p —> oo. From the
debt equation (29) we see that on such a path b eventually becomes negative and
more negative over time. This implies that b goes to zero in finite time. From the
point of view of private agents in the economy, since we assume they can't borrow
from the government, this means that their future tax obligations exceed their wealth
in the form of government debt, and thus that they cannot finance their planned con
sumption with the income and wealth they have. They will therefore reduce con
sumption and try to save. If they truly have perfect foresight, this would instantly,
at the initial date t = 0, bring pQ back to the level consistent with stability. If it
takes agents some time to realize what kind of a path they are on, the adjustment
might come with a delay, still producing the same reversion to the stable solu
tion. Unstable paths with accelerating deflation can also be ruled out. On such
paths, real debt would rise without bound, while primary surpluses shrank and
eventually became negative. Now people would see their wealth in the form of
government debt growing without bound, with no offsetting increase in future tax
obligations. They would therefore spend, raising prices, bringing the economy
back to its stable path.

These arguments do not depend on the size of 4>2, so long as it is positive. In equi
librium, 7r will be zero or (if people are imperfectly foresighted, or if we add random
disturbances to the system) fluctuate in a narrow range. If 4>2 is small enough, its
presence might be difficult to detect from data. In any case its presence would have
no effect on the first two equations of the system or on the equilibrium time path
of prices and interest rates, except for its elimination of the unstable solutions as
equilibria of the economy.

C. Debt as a Fiscal Cushion

Barro (1979) showed in a simple, stylized model that in the presence of distort
ing taxation it is not optimal to rapidly pay off public debt, because the deadweight
losses from heavy initial taxation to reduce the debt are not offset by the present
value of lower future deadweight losses after the debt is reduced. Instead, in his
model, debt and tax revenue optimally follow a martingale process, with E,bt+l
= b„ E,t,+i = Tt. (Here r is total tax revenue.) In his framework, r increases with
increases in b. Lucas and Stokey (1983) showed that when the government can issue
contingent liabilities, it is actually optimal for taxes to be set without reference to
the current level of debt. Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe ( 1994) showed that monetary
policy, by determining inflation, can create appropriate contingencies in the return to
debt. I showed (Sims 2001) that if these insights are brought back to Barro's (1979)
stylized framework, we get a simple and stark conclusion—r should be constant,