Notes: The matrix shows the structure of penalties in the Climate Club. For example, the lower left cell indicates  that when exporting countries are nonparticipants and importing countries are participants, the trade of exporters is  penalized. In all other cases, there are no penalties.
coalition and calculate the outcomes and net benefits. Denote these the initial "base
coalition" and "base outcomes." (ii) Randomly generate a "change coalition" of a set of
m regions from the n regions. Assume that each of the m regions changes its participation
from out to in or from in to out. (iii) Construct a new test pattern of participations,
substituting the new participation status of the change coalition for its participation in
the base coalition, (iv) Calculate the test net benefits of the new test participation for
each region, (v) If the test net benefits are Pareto improving for the change coalition,
substitute the test participation pattern and other outcomes for the prior base outcomes
to get new base participation and outcomes. Note that while the results of the test coalition
will be Pareto improving for the change coalition in the new outcomes, it may
not improve the welfare for the balance of regions, (vi) Go back and restart from (ii) to
generate a new random change coalition and then go through steps (iii)-(v). (vii) The
procedure stops either when (a) the process cycles (a coalition structure repeats), or
(b) no other coalition is able to overturn the existing base coalition.
Note that the termination in (viib) cannot be determined with certainty because
of the probabilistic nature of the algorithm. However, because the change coalition
is randomly selected, in the worst case the likelihood of there being an overturning
coalition that has not been found is no more than (1 - 2~n)m after m iterations.
Experiments indicate that stable coalitions are usually found within 100 iterations.
I examined up to 50,000 iterations and random starting coalitions to test stability.
While this algorithm might potentially be improved with bounding refinements, the
flexibility of the evolutionary algorithm for finding stable coalitions suggests it is
adequate. Further details are provided in the online Appendix.
VII. Results
A. A First Example
Before diving into the results, it will be useful to present a numerical example.
Assume that the international target carbon price is $25 per ton; that the penalty
tariff rate is 4 percent; that all high-income countries participate; and that the United
States is considering whether to participate. The numbers are shown in Table