and disordered, narrative (Saavedra, Cubero, and Crawford 2009). Hearing voices
as a symptom of schizophrenia is correlated with volume deficits in specific brain
areas (Gaser et al. 2004). The narrative disruption found in autism spectrum disorder
also is related to brain anomalies (Losh and Gordon 2014; Pierce et al. 2001).
Narrative psychology is also related to the psychologists' concept of framing
(Kahneman and Tversky 2000; Thaler 2015, 2016). If we can create an amusing
story that will get retold, it can establish a point of view, a reference point, which
will have influence on decisions. It is also related to the Kahneman and Tversky
(1973) representativeness heuristic, whereby people form their expectations based
on similarity of circumstance to some idealized story or model, and tend to neglect
base-rate probabilities.
Psychologists have noted an affect heuristic, whereby people who are experiencing
strong emotions, such as fear, tend to extend their feelings to unrelated happenings
(Slovic et al. 2007). Sometimes people note strong emotions or fears about
possibilities that they know logically are not real, suggesting that the brain has multiple
systems for assessing risk, and the "risk as feelings" hypothesis that some
primitive brain system more connected to palpable emotions has its own heuristic
for assessing risk (Loewenstein et al. 2001.)
In joint work with Goetzmann and Kim (2016), using data from a questionnaire
survey I have been conducting with institutional investors and high-income
Americans since 1989, we found that these people generally have exaggerated
assessments of the risk of a stock market crash, and that these assessments are influenced
by the news stories, especially front page stories, that they read. One intriguing
finding was that an event such as an earthquake could influence estimations of the
likelihood of a stock market crash. The respondents in our survey gave statistically
significantly higher probabilities to a stock market crash if there had been an earthquake
within 30 miles of their zip code within 30 days, triggering the affect heuristic.
It seems reasonable to hypothesize that local earthquakes start local narratives
with negative emotional valence. Analogous evidence has been found of seemingly
irrelevant events with narrative potential having effects on economic or political
outcomes: the effect of World Cup outcomes on economic confidence (Dohmen et
al. 2006) and of background music in advertisements on viewers (Boltz, Schulkind,
and Kantra 1991).
The news media, for which the survival of any one organization is never assured
in a competitive news marketplace, must become adept at managing the news to
make narratives work in their favor. Moreover, news media embellish the emphasized
news with human interest stories. Given the large and often dramatic degree
of news media coverage of disasters - natural and man-made - and of crimes and
human interest stories, it seems clear that news media believe that covering such
events will result in increased sales and attention for their news products. However,
little attention has been given to the impact of such news stories on other stories in
the same publication.
IV. Epidemic Models
The Kermack-McKendrick (1927) mathematical theory of disease epidemics
marked a revolution in medical thinking because it gave a reali