What if initial R,_xBt_{ = 0? So long as we maintain the constraint that B0 > 0,
fiscal policy cannot then at t = 0 be simply to set r to its constant value. The old at
time 0 in this case have no way to finance consumption. It is plausible then to sup
pose that the government imposes the tax ron the young, issues new debt bought by
the young, and uses the proceeds to provide a subsidy to the time-0 old. From that
point on the equilibrium would be as we have calculated above.

B. Fiscal Backup for a Taylor Rule

Cochrane (2007) has argued against attempts to claim a determinate price level in
models with Taylor-rule monetary policy by invoking "fiscal backing" that comes
into play only off the equilibrium path. I don't understand his reasoning, but in any
case the simple model of this section shows that we can also justify uniqueness of
the price level with a Taylor rule by invoking fiscal backing that is always in play,
even in equilibrium, but is negligibly small in size. The equilibrium is then arbitrarily
close to that of the model without fiscal backing. In this and the preceding model,
we conclude that the existence of fiscal backing is important for stable prices, but
that if market perception of the backing is there, the size of the backing can be quite
small in equilibrium. Institutions like those in the EMU that make it unclear where
the fiscal backing would come from, or even whether it exists, are destabilizing; yet
in normal times, because large fiscal-backing interventions do not occur in equilib
rium, it is easy for the importance of fiscal backing to be lost sight of.

The model is very simple, a continuous time extension of Leeper's (1991) original
framework. The monetary policy rule is

(21) r = i(0p - (r- p)).

This makes the nominal interest rate r respond with a delay (larger 7 means less
delay) to inflation p. The "Taylor principle" that the interest rate should eventually
respond more than one for one to inflation changes corresponds here to 9 > 1.
We assume a constant real rate p and a no-risk-aversion Fisher equation connect
ing a constant real rate p and the nominal rate:

(22) r = p + p.

The p notation represents the right time derivative of the expected path of the log of
the price level. On a perfect foresight solution path, p = p at all dates after the initial
date, but p can move discontinuously at the initial date. These two equations (21)
and (22) can be solved to yield a second order differential equation in p:

(23) p = -y(0-l)p,

which holds after the initial date / = 0 on any perfect foresight equilibrium path.
With 9 > 1, this is an unstable differential equation, with solutions of the form p,
= p0elly6~r'1'.

Leeper assumed that such explosive paths for the price level were not equilibrium
paths and focused on the one stable solution to the equation, p = 0. On such a path