it is undertaken, and this reduces the bribes for all the other officials. Each demands bribes that
are excessive from the point of view of their collective revenues. It would be better for the officialdom
 to have one agency, which could then "internalize" this "negative externality" among
bribe-seekers. They could set lower bribes and yet increase their take. And the lower bribes
would increase the volume of the activity and therefore be better for general economic efficiency.
The multiple licenses form a package of perfect complements because all of them are required
for the activity to proceed and, as is well known, it is better for providers and users alike to have a
package of perfect complements supplied by a monopolist rather than by competing oligopolists.
The preferred method for achieving this outcome is a "one-stop" licensing agency that is empowered
 to issue all the licenses the entrepreneur requires. Such agencies have been formed by some
US states to lower the overall transaction cost of setting up businesses in their states, but this
can also serve to reduce the level of corruption in many countries (including the United States).
Carrying the idea further, if there were two or more one-stop agencies, both empowered to issue
all licenses, so someone starting a business could choose one or the other for all his licensing
needs, then competition between the agencies could drive the bribes down further, perhaps all
the way to zero. I wonder if this is a practicable suggestion.
IV. Enforcement of Contracts
In the absence of some form of governance, contracts run into problems of prisoner's dilemmas.
 Some contracts require one party to act first, in anticipation of reciprocal action by the
other. But when the time comes, the other party may be tempted to renege on its promise. The
fear of this may deter the first from acting at all; therefore mutual benefits may go unrealized.
The classic description of this is in Thomas Hobbes's Leviathan (1651 [2005], chap. 14): "If a
Covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties performe presently, but trust one another; in the
condition of meer Nature, (which is a condition of Warre of every man against every man,) upon
any reasonable suspition, it is Voyd; But if there be a common Power set over them bothe, with
right and force sufficient to compel? performance; it is not Voyd. For he that performeth first, has
no assurance the other will performe after; because the bonds of words are too weak to bridle
mens ambition, avarice, anger, and other Passions, without the feare of some coerceive Power."
Oliver Williamson (1985) has labeled this the problem of opportunism and hold-up, and Greif
(2006) calls it a one-sided prisoner's dilemma.
In other situations the two parties act effectively simultaneously: a good or a service is
exchanged for some form of payment. But in most instances the quality of the product is not
immediately apparent, and the payment is only a promise, even if the delay is as little as 30 days
of trade credit. Then the situation is a familiar simultaneous-action prisoner's dilemma, neatly
exemplified by what a cattle rancher told Gambetta (1993, 15) in the course of his study of the
Sicilian Mafia: "When the butcher comes to me to buy an animal, he knows that I want to cheat
him [by supplying a low-quality animal]. But I know that he wants to cheat me [by reneging on
payment]. Thus we need Peppe [the third-party mafioso] to make us agree. And we both pay
Peppe a commission." Here we have the case for governance, and also one form of private governance,
 in a nutshell.
A. Governance Using Social Preferences
I classify methods of private governance of contracts into first-party, second-party, and third
party systems. First-party systems operate on the potential cheater's own internal value system:
either internal satisfaction or pleasure of behaving honorably, or an internalized sense of shame