A small literature has cited indirect evidence to argue that the lower bound did
not much constrain  post-crisis monetary policy in the United States (see Swanson
2018 for further discussion). For example, Swanson and Williams (2014) showed
that market interest rates reacted to economic news in about the same way after the
crisis as before, suggesting that the proximity of the lower bound had limited effect
on market expectations of the monetary policy response to changes in the outlook.
Debortoli, Galí, and Gambetti (2019) found that the cyclical behaviors of key macroeconomic
and financial variables during the Great Recession were not atypical, as
they should have been if monetary policy had been constrained by the lower bound.
However, in contrast to the research cited above, other work finds that the constraint
imposed by the lower bound led to materially worse outcomes after the crisis,
despite the new policy tools. In a 2015 paper, Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider
used simulations of FRB/US, a model of the US economy used extensively by
Federal Reserve Board staff in forecasting and policy analysis, to perform a retroactive
assessment of the macroeconomic effects of the Fed’s policies. They found
that, taken together, QE and forward guidance helped to ease financial conditions
after the lower bound was reached, but that the economy nevertheless enjoyed a
meaningful boost beginning only in 2011. The limited benefit of the new tools in
2009–2010, according to their simulations, was the result of the ineffectiveness of
the Fed’s early forward guidance, as noted earlier; the gradual accumulation of the
effects of asset purchases, which peaked only after the introduction of QE3 in 2012;
and, importantly, the lagged effects inherent in all monetary policies. In 2011, these
authors found, use of the new tools began to speed up the recovery appreciably. That
led to an unemployment rate in early 2015 about 1.25 percentage points lower and,
slightly later, to inflation about 0.5 percentage points higher, relative to the counter -
factual with no use of new tools.
In a similar vein, Eberly, Stock, and Wright (2019) found that  post-crisis monetary
policies reduced the slope of the yield curve and assisted the recovery. However,
they estimated that an unconstrained monetary policy would have set the federal
funds rate as much as 5 percentage points below zero, and that the new policies made
up only about 1 percentage point. Gust et al. (2017), previously cited, also found
that the lower bound significantly constrained monetary policy during and after the
crisis. Based on simulations, they calculated that the lower bound accounted for
about 30 percent of the sharp contraction in 2009 and also contributed importantly
to the slowness of the recovery.
My reading of the  post-crisis experience is that, in both the United States and
elsewhere, the new policy tools helped ease financial conditions and led ultimately
to significantly better economic outcomes than would have otherwise occurred. In
particular, model simulations do not fully account for the beneficial effects of the
policy interventions on confidence,  risk-taking, and credit flows, each of which was
badly damaged by the crisis. However, it also seems unlikely that the new tools
deployed during the Great Recession entirely compensated for the limits imposed
by the lower bound. Particularly in the early  post-crisis period, monetary policymakers
were uncertain about the economic outlook, concerned about the costs and risks
of the new tools, and learning through experience how to implement and communicate
about them. Thus, policymakers were more cautious and less effective than
they would be later. Notably, in the United States, neither QE nor forw