land, livestock, and produce. Gradually the protectors got together to form the association that
became the Mafia. The knowledge that a property was under the protection of the Mafia acted
as a deterrent. If that didn't work, the protectors resorted to varying degrees of violence against
transgressors.
However, private protection of property has some important harmful effects. The Mafia's protection
offered to its customers, unlike the state's protection that is in principle available to
everyone, creates a negative externality. Thieves selectively target the unprotected properties,
so extending protection to one property raises the probability that other properties will be hit.
That, in turn, increases their demand for the protection service. Thus, the Mafia is able to extract
a high price for its service, and can make this externality-dependent high value evident by not
covering everyone.
Can private institutions guard private property rights against the government's pr?dationThis
is a complicated collective action problem. An individual is helpless against a government;
even in an ongoing relationship, one person cannot offer the government the prospect
of a large enough future payoff to keep it honest in its dealings with him today. A group can
threaten to boycott collectively a ruler who violates the rights of even one of its members. But
the boycott is costly for each trader to enforce; he is forgoing profitable opportunities to sell
in that ruler's markets. Therefore, the ruler can try to peel off individuals from this boycott by
offering them special deals, and individuals will be tempted. Thus a second layer of punishments
is needed: the group must threaten to boycott any of its own members who don't participate
in the original boycott against the ruler. And a third layer... ; in fact a whole penal code.
Greif, Paul Milgrom, and Barry Weingast (1994) show how guilds in medieval Europe solved
collective action problems in just such a way; see also Greif (2006, chap. 4).
Can modern business associations play similar roles, and enforce an anticorruption normThey
collectively stand to benefit if the government does not extract bribes, but each has the
individual temptation to get better treatment through bribery. In reasonably small and well
connected groups, the knowledge that someone gained a contract or license through bribery
will spread quickly. Then the norm should stipulate that no one will deal with him. The cheater
is going to need some things?material inputs, trade credit, and so on?from the others. If
the others ostracize him, he will be unable to fulfill the contract and so won't profit from his
bribery. Of course, he can try to induce some of the others to violate the ban by offering them
shares in his profits. But that is taken care of by the second layer of the stipulation: anyone
who engages in dealings with a cheater is himself labeled a cheater and ostracized, and so on,
to further levels. Christopher Kingston (2008) constructs a model of such an equilibrium. If
the business association includes media entrepreneurs, it may also be possible to ensure media
exposure, and resist attempts to control or censor media. All this is perhaps too optimistic, but
I don't think it has been tried anywhere, so we don't know for certain that it can't work.5 It may
have some chance of success in a country like India, where there is an established business
community with quite good information networks and some leadership by the most prominent
businesspersons.
One more point about corruption is worth making: whether the corruption is organized or
disorganized makes a difference. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1998, chap. 5) and Easterly
(2001, 247-48) point out that if some economic activity requires many licenses that must be
obtained from different officials or agencies, each of them fails to take into account the fact that
if he raises the amount of the bribe he demands, the cost of the activity rises; therefore, less of