revise our estimates of the prevalence of global poverty. The belief that the new ICP makes the
world poorer comes from missing the fact that the updating procedure had increased the global
line, and then attributing the increase in poverty to the ICP revision on the mistaken belief that
the dollar-a-day line is actually denominated in dollars. I shall argue below that denominating
the global line in dollars would be a good idea, but as long as it is an average of poor country
lines, an ICP revision that makes the United States look richer relative to those lines can have no
effect on the global poverty counts.

As we saw in Section I, the ICP revision did indeed make the world look more unequal, and
it reduced the size of poorer economies relative to richer economies. In that sense, judged from
a rich country standpoint, the "developing world" does indeed appear to be poorer. However,
global poverty is measured relative to standards set in the poor countries themselves, so that the
apparent expansion of inequality cannot, and does not, increase the global poverty count. The
count is invariant to any inequality expanding uniform downward rescaling of the international
dollar value of consumption in countries in the count relative to the excluded rich countries.
Because the expansion in inequality comes about through increases in the measured price levels
in poor countries relative to rich countries, this shows up in the poverty calculations through a
real decrease in the global poverty line. The $1.08 in 1993 prices, which would have been $1.46
in 2005 prices if it had been indexed for the US CPI, is in fact only 92 cents in Table 4. The ratio
of $1.46 to 92c is a measure of the extent to which the ICP has revised upwards the price levels
in poor relative to rich countries, which is the issue to which I now turn.
IV. Quality and Inequality Around the World

Understanding why the ICP has increased measured global inequality is more difficult than
understanding why measured poverty has changed. Several different factors are at work, and it is
not always clear how to assess the contribution of each. Any change from the 1993 ICP involves
not only the new procedures, but also the old ones, many of which?especially the linking of