Compared with the actual In v7, (5) introduces variance through the estimation of the parameters,
an effect that is likely to be small, but removes variance because the variance oft is not included
in the imputation. Over successive rounds of the ICP, as fewer PPPs are imputed and more actu
ally measured, measured inequality will rise. The variance oft estimated from (5) using the
pre-revision 2005 data (and including the imputations) is 0.084, which needs to be multiplied
by the change in the fraction of covered countries (about 0.25) before it is compared with the
increase in the actual variance of log GDP in 2005 of 0.370. So the reduction in the share of
countries imputed cannot explain more than a small part of the increase in measured inequality.
B. Comparisons between Rich and Poor Countries in the Ring

The most important question for international comparisons of prices is how to make useful
comparisons across widely different countries, in different regions of the world, with different
levels of per capita GDP, and with different patterns of consumption and relative prices. The
regional structure of successive ICPs means that this issue is most serious when the regions are
linked because, in spite of there being a good deal of heterogeneity within some regions, e.g.,
Hong Kong and Nepal are both in Asia-Pacific in 2005, the widest disparities are across regions.
To investigate this further, we need to look in some detail at the operation of the "ring" in the
2005 ICP, the collection of more than 1,000 precisely specified identical items in eighteen coun
tries distributed over the regions.

Past rounds of the ICP have been criticized for not comparing like with like; a cotton shirt, a
pair of sandals, or brain surgery in Cameroon or Senegal are plausibly of lower quality than the
same items in Japan or Hong Kong, so that comparing the prices of such loosely defined items
may overstate living standards in poor countries relative to rich. In the 2005 round, the ring list,
like the regional lists, used precisely specified definitions of goods and services in order to avoid
quality mismatching, and this is cited as an important reason for the differentially large increase
in the PPPs of poor countries: World Bank (2008b, p.l), Ravallion, Chen, and Sangraula (2009,
p. 178). We can see how this works by looking at the 18 ring countries as a group and calculating a
set of PPPs for them using the standard methodology, the CPD regressions (1) and (2) to get pari
ties for each basic heading, followed by aggregation to multilateral PPPs for those 18 countries
alone. Because the United States is not a ring country, I select the United Kingdom as base and
calculate the "price level" of consumption goods and services included in the ring list for each of
the ring countries relative to the United Kingdom; this is defined as the ratio of the PPP in local
currency per pound sterling divided by the market exchange rate of local currency per pound
sterling. Numbers less than one indicate that a British tourist would find the value of exchange
rate converted pounds worth more than in Britain.

The log price levels are plotted against the logarithm of per capita GDP in Figure 4 which
shows that Cameroon, Kenya, Senegal, and Zambia are outliers in having high price levels rela
tive to their levels of per capita GDP; the regression line is fitted to the other 14 ring countries
and is close to the comparable regression (4) estimated for all countries in the 2005 ICP. More
generally, the PPPs and price levels for the poorest countries are higher when calculated from
the ring alone than they are in the ICP itself, where the ring prices work only through the overall
regional PPPs. Particularly notable is Cameroon, where the price level from the ring alone, 0.673,
is higher than in Estonia and almost as high as in Hong Kong; indeed, if the ring calculations are
done using geometric mean price indexes instead of the CPD in (1), the price level in Cameroon
is higher than the price level in Hong Kong, an implausible result given the relative levels of GDP  in the two countries.
The immediate concern with these high price levels is that, in the attempt to match goods
precisely across such diverse countries, the ICP may be pricing high-end "western" goods in