These results are presented in the spirit of an extended example used to clarify the
free-riding in international agreements rather than as a specific proposal for a climate
treaty. A Climate Club of the kind analyzed here raises central issues about the
purpose of the global trading system, about the goals for slowing climate change,
about the justice of a system that puts all countries on the same footing, and about
how countries would actually negotiate such a regime. The dangers to the world
trading system of such a proposal are so important that they must be reiterated.
Today's open trading system is the result of decades of negotiations to combat protectionism.
It has undoubtedly produced large gains to living standards around the

world. A regime that ties a climate-change agreement to the trading system should
be embraced only if the benefits to slowing climate change are clear and the dangers
to the trading system are worth the benefits.

C. Results

One major result is to confirm that a regime without trade sanctions will dissipate
to the low-abatement, noncooperative (NC) equilibrium. This is true starting from
a random selection of participating countries. More interestingly, starting from the
Kyoto coalition (Annex I countries as defined by the Kyoto treaty) with no sanctions,
the coalition always degenerates to the NC structure with minimal abatement.
A surprising result is that the Climate Club structure generates stable coalitions
for virtually all sets of parameters. A few regimes produce quasi-stable coalitions
with similar numbers of participants.

A next set of results concerns the impact of different Climate Club parameters
on the participation structure. The participation rate and the average global carbon
price rise with the tariff rate. For the lowest target carbon prices ($12.5 and $25 per
ton), full participation and efficiency are achieved with relatively low tariffs (2 percent
or more). However, as the target carbon price rises, it becomes increasingly
difficult to attain the cooperative equilibrium. For a $50 per ton target carbon price,
the Club can attain 90+ percent efficiency with a tariff rate of 5 percent or more.
However, for a target carbon price of $100 per ton, it is difficult to induce more than
the noncooperative level of abatement.

Why is it so difficult to attain efficient abatement with high social costs of
carbon even with high penalty tariffs? The reason is that the gap between the
cooperative and the noncooperative equilibrium rises sharply as the global SCC
increases. Take the case of a large country like China or the United States. For
these countries the national SCC might be 10 percent of the global SCC. For a
global SCC and target price of $25 per ton, participation would require increasing
the domestic carbon price from $2.5 to $25, while a global SCC of $100

would require increasing from $10 to $100. Because abatement costs are sharply
increasing in the target carbon price, this implies that the costs of cooperation
become much larger as the target carbon price rises. On the other hand, the costs
of trade penalties associated with nonparticipation are independent of the global
SCC. So the national cost-benefit trade-off tilts toward nonparticipation as the
international target carbon price rises.

Next examine the patterns of gains and losses. Here, measure the impact relative
to the noncooperative equilibrium. Note as well that these resul
