return that households earn from savings and the rate at which businesses and
households borrow.
The economy in the model lasts for many years and households last as long as
the economy. Households consume nondurable goods and services and the services
of durables, including housing. Output is divided among three uses: non
durables consumption, investment in new durables and housing, and investment
in business capital. The length of a period is a calendar quarter. Because the real
interest rate is bounded by the negative of the rate of inflation, a low-employment
equilibrium may occur in the product market in any quarter. Both types of investment
incur standard quadratic adjustment costs, captured by Tobin's model of
investment. As before, household preferences have constant intertemporal elasticity
of substitution.
Uncertainty is not an important element in the model. In particular, the model
lacks any second-moment effects. Decision-makers have perfect foresight. I don't
regard this as a realistic assumption, but experience has shown that perfect-foresight
models give surprisingly good accounts of what happens in a dynamic model once
a major surprise becomes known.
I solve in two phases. First, for the model when the interest-rate bound does not
bind, I find the consumption function C(z), where z is a vector of endogenous and
exogenous state variables. The elements of z are the two types of capital, business
capital (plant and equipment) k and household capital (houses and consumer durables)
d, the level of committed debt service s, and the level of the financial friction/.
To find the function, I solve the model for many different values of the vector z and
fit an interpolation function. The online Appendix reports the function and explains
its derivation.
For T early periods, the lower bound on the real interest rate associated with
government currency is binding. I solve this part of the model for the values
of all variables in all of the binding periods. Thus I treat all the values of all
the variables as one big vector of 5T-8 unknowns and solve that many nonlinear
equations jointly for their exact values. The model requires that the last value of
consumption match the consumption function C(z) for that period's values of the
state variables z. The online Appendix supplies more information about the solution
process.
A. Technology, Adjustment Costs, Rental Prices, and Capital Demand
The technology for producing output y is Cobb-Douglas with labor elasticity a:
(18) yt = n?{xtkt_xy-?.
Here, xt is the utilization rate for capital. Output is the production of goods, which
are used to make capital, houses, and consumer durables, or are consumed directly.
The price of output is py t.
The value of the marginal product of labor is
(19) mt = apytt
l-a