the behavior of all economic agents, not just experts? The life-cycle hypothesis
is intended to be a theory of how the typical citizen saves for retirement, not just
those with MBAs.

There is another problem with Friedman's defense, which is that even experts
are unable to optimize when the problems are difficult. To illustrate, let's return to
the game of chess. Since chess has no stochastic elements, it has long been known
that if both players optimize then one of the players (either the one who goes first
or second) must have a winning strategy, or neither of them do and the game will
lead to a draw. However, unlike checkers, which has been "solved" (if both players
optimize the game is a draw) chess matches do not yield predictable outcomes even
in matches between grandmasters. Sometimes white (first player) wins, less often
black wins, and there are many draws. This proves that even the best chess players
in the world do not maximize. Of course one can argue that chess is a hard game,
which is true. But, many economic decisions are difficult as well.

A second line of defense is to concede that we don't all do everything like experts
but argue that, if our errors are randomly distributed with mean zero, then they will
wash out in the aggregate, leaving the predictions of the model unbiased on average.
This was often the reaction to Simon's (1955) suggestion that people "satisfice"
(meaning grope for a satisfactory solution rather than solve for an optimal one). If
the choices of a satisficer are not systematically different from an optimizer, then
the models lead to identical average predictions (though satisficers will have more
noise). This line of argument was refuted by the seminal work of Daniel Kahneman
and Amos Tversky in the 1970s.

In a brilliant series of experiments on what psychologists refer to as "judgment"
and what economists might call "expectations" or "beliefs," Tversky and Kahneman
(1974) showed that humans make judgments that are systematically biased.

Furthermore, these errors were predictable based on a theory of human cognition.
Kahneman and Tversky's hypothesis was that people often make judgments using
some kind of rule of thumb or heuristic. An example is the "availability heuristic"
in which people estimate the frequency of some event by the ease with which they
can recall instances of that event. Using this heuristic is perfectly sensible since
frequency and ease of recall are generally positively correlated. However, use of
the heuristic will lead to predictable errors in those situations where frequency and
ease of recall diverge. For example, when asked to estimate the ratio of gun deaths
by homicide to gun deaths by suicide in the United States, most people think homicide
gun deaths are more common, whereas there are in fact nearly twice as many

gun-inflicted suicides as homicides. These are expectations that are not close to
being "as if' rational - they are predictably biased.

Kahneman and Tversky's second influential line of research was on decision

making. In particular, in 1979 they published their paper on prospect theory, which
was proposed as a "descriptive" (or what Milton Friedman would have called "positive"
) model of decision making under uncertainty. Prospect theory was intended

to be a descriptive alternative to von Neumann and Morgenstern's (1947) expected
utility theory, which is rightly considered by most economists to characterize how
a rational agent should make risky choices. Kahneman and Tversky's research documented
numerous choices that violate any sensible definition of rational. This pair
of problems posed to different groups of subjects offers a good illustra
