But this story, like any story about the effects of monetary policy, has a fiscal pol
icy backstory. Because reserve deposits and Treasury securities are close substitutes,
raising the rate on reserve deposits would also raise rates on government debt gener
ally. The level of US government debt relative to GDP is at unprecedented levels. If
debt were at 100 percent of GDP, a rise in interest rates to 6 percent from its current
level of about 2 percent would bring interest expense, now less than 10 percent of
total Federal government expenditure, to 30 percent of government expenditure,
increasing the conventionally measured deficit drastically if there were no response
of fiscal policy. Would there be a response? Some years ago the answer might have
been, "Surely yes." But the increase in the conventional deficit would be so large
that the response would have to involve substantial increases in tax revenue. With
recent repeated congressional games of chicken over the debt limit and inability to
bargain to a resolution of long-term budget problems, the answer may now be in
some doubt.

With the central bank keeping interest rates stable in the face of inflation fluctua
tions and fiscal authorities not increasing primary surpluses in response to increased
real debt, the price level is still likely to be determinate. But the main determinant
of inflation becomes the fiscal deficit, rather than changes in the usual instruments
of monetary policy.

B. Paper Money Requires Fiscal Backing

It is easy to construct models of economies in which unbacked paper money can
have value, but in such models it is generally also possible for money to be valueless,
or to dwindle rapidly in value so that the economy approaches a barter equilibrium.
In such models, introducing taxation either to pay interest on government liabilities
or to contract the supply of non-interest-bearing liabilities (and thus, via deflation,
create a real return) tends to resolve the indeterminacy and provide a uniquely deter
mined price level. The first two examples in Section III below show quite different
models in which this pattern of results hold.

Depending on the institutional setup, the fiscal backing can be apparent in
equilibrium, as with taxation to service a stable volume of nominal debt, or it
can be implicit, invoked only under unusual circumstances, as with a commit
ment to treasury transfers to the central bank if the central bank balance sheet
deteriorates. But in evaluating monetary and fiscal institutions, the question of
the nature of fiscal backing for the price level is a useful starting point. It led me
(Sims 2004; 1999) to think about where fiscal backing could come from in the
European Monetary Union (EMU) and what kinds of conditions might force the

EMU to confront the need for fiscal backing. Those two papers speculated about
policy dilemmas that at the time might have been seen as obscure and unlikely,
but now seem practically relevant. The policy discussion in the EMU during this
recent crisis period has focused on fiscal transfers that will arise as partial default
on Greek and possibly other euro area sovereign debt occurs. While resolving the
allocation of these losses that have already occurred is important, controversy
over them has hindered discussion of ways to provide clear fiscal backing for the
euro, which is in many ways an easier problem. I discuss these issues in more
detail in Sims (2012).
