was explicitly tied to economic conditions until the introduction of  state-contingent
guidance for QE3 in late 2012. And, in retrospect, the economic thresholds set by
the FOMC for those policies were insufficiently aggressive. It also took time for
financial market participants and others to understand the new tools and the evolving
reaction functions of central banks. While these observations imply that the early
stage of the recovery from the Great Recession were less strong than it conceivably
could have been, they also suggest that, with improved understanding and the benefit
of experience, these policies could be significantly more effective the next time
they are needed.19
B. How Much Policy Space Can the New Monetary Tools ProvideLooking
forward, in a world in which  short-term interest rates could hit the lower
bound much more frequently, and traditional monetary policies accordingly could
be less effective, how much additional policy space can the new monetary tools provideAs
noted by Kiley and Roberts (2017) and others, and as I will demonstrate,
the answer depends importantly on the prevailing level of the neutral interest rate,
defined here as the interest rate associated with full employment and inflation at
target in the  long-run steady state—and, therefore, with monetary policies that, on
average, are neither expansionary nor contractionary. I focus here on the potential
only of QE and forward guidance, leaving aside other tools, like  funding-for-lending
and negative interest rates, that might provide some additional space if necessary.
A small literature has used DSGE models to study this issue. For example, Gertler
and Karadi (2013) modeled QE as a means by which the central bank can substitute
for the private sector in intermediating credit during periods of financial stress.
Incorporating this interpretation into an otherwise standard new Keynesian model,
they found in simulations that QE can have powerful effects on output but—not
unexpectedly, given their modeling approach—that these effects are largely confined
to periods of disruption in private credit flows. Sims and Wu (2019) expanded the
Gertler-Karadi framework to include forward guidance (and negative interest rates
as well). They found that QE is particularly effective in achieving monetary policy
objectives, largely offsetting the lower bound in both a simulation meant to mirror
the Great Recession and in simulations aimed at capturing the  long-run behavior
of the US economy. These studies, and others in the DSGE tradition, improve our
understanding of specific mechanisms by which QE and other new tools affect the
economy. The trade-off is that, in their focus on particular mechanisms, these models
may omit other key channels. For example, the  Gertler-Karadi framework does
not include a portfolio balance channel for QE, despite the evidence in its favor.
With the microfoundations of the new tools still under construction, many studies
of the potential role for such policies have used FRB/ US or other macroeconometric
models favored by central banks. These models, though motivated by economic
theory, typically contain ad hoc elements. Their advantages are that they are  flexible,
include substantial sectoral detail, and—having been workhorses of policy analysis
for many years—tend to produce quantitatively plausible results in diverse