companies), prostitution, and actual and implicit rental for housing. This drop is largely driven by
housing rental, and by replacing the neutral volume assumption by the neutral price assumption,
as discussed above. Once we switch to surveys as the source for the aggregate weights, but still
hold with P3s and with the unweighted average of 14 poverty lines, the line falls to R17.81. The
second row shows the effects of moving to poverty-weighted PPPs, first retaining the unweighted
14-country averaging, and second with 50-country poverty-weighted averaging. The first step,
replacing the P3s with P4s, leaves the line within the range established in the first row, but the
second step, which brings in the Indian and Chinese poverty lines, shows a marked reduction
in the global line, to R16.04 which, not surprisingly, lies within the range of the Indian official  rural and urban lines.
Table 4 shows the implications of the different lines for the global poverty counts. Given that
the United States is not, and cannot be, included in the P4 indexes, there is no US to rupee P4
to convert international rupees to international dollars. Instead, DD (2009, Table 13) calculate
"star" PPPs comparing the United States with each of the countries they use, with each country's
currency first converted into international rupees using the P4s. Star PPPs are computed one
country at a time and are Fisher price indexes between each country and the United States, with
poverty line weights for the 62 countries and the national accounts weights for the United States,
the idea being to compare market consumption in the United States?the consumption of the
rich-world audience to whom the global counts are directed?with the consumption of those near
the global line in each country. It turns out that these star rates do not vary much from country to
country, so DD use an average to convert the rupee lines back to dollars. Table 4 again starts with
the official calculation, somewhat updated from World Bank (2008b), and Table 1, with a global
poverty line of $1.25 in 2005 international dollars and a global count of 1,319 million. The next
row shows the global line and counts using P4s and averaging lines over 14 countries; the global
line is R18.97 or $1.064 and the global count falls to 1,164 million. As we have seen in the step
by step calculations in Table 3, the main reason for the drop of 155 million in the poverty count is
the change in the treatment of housing. The final row again uses P4s, but now with poverty-count
weighted averages of 50 national lines. In this final calculation, the global line falls to R 16.04
or $0.922, and the global count to 874 million, two-thirds of the number with which we started,
and only 57 million less than would have been estimated using the methods in place before the  revision of the ICP.
These calculations show that, provided we use a sensible method for setting the global line,
neither the wider collection of poverty lines nor the ICP revision has generated any great need to