to include not only a refusal to bribe, and publicizing the agent's misdeeds, but also sanctions
against other businesspersons who try to benefit from bribery.
Finally, domestic and foreign businesspersons alike should explore the potential of taking
private leadership in institution design and reform.
B. Suggestions for Policy Advisers
The advisers from Western countries, international organizations, and even academia who prescribe
 institutional and policy reforms to less-developed countries and transition economies need
to remember one very important general principle. You should first achieve a good understanding
 of the structure and properties of the existing institutional equilibrium. This understanding is
important even if (especially if?) your aim is to undermine and replace the institutions. But there
is more. Before recommending any change, you should determine whether existing institutions
and organizations are there for a good reason, and how your reforms would interact with them
in the short run and the long run. I am not saying that everything that is there is there for a good
reason, but it is better to start with a presumption in favor of what has existed for a while than
the presumption that everything should be changed to match the successful formal institutions in
advanced countries. The biologist Richard Dawkins had similar advice for his colleagues when
they tried to understand the role of some specific feature of an animal or plant: "Evolution is
smarter than you are" (quoted by Easterly 2008). In the same way, people "on the ground" who
have been developing and using an arrangement for decades may be smarter than the outside
expert who has spent a few days at most in the country.
I should emphasize, again, that this suggestion is not meant to accept the status quo unthinkingly,
 but merely to think carefully. In biological evolution, what we observe may not be optimal
adaptations at all, but instead "remnants of the past that don't make sense in present terms"
(Stephen Jay Gould 1980 28), or "spandrels" that are side-effects of other adaptations (Gould,
1997). Similarly, a social custom or institution may be an irrelevant or even dysfunctional accident
of history. The successful reformer will combine respect for the past and thoughtful innovation.
C. Suggestions for Policymakers
Others may advise, but ultimately the governments and the political process of a country must
decide whether and how to reform its institutions and policies. There are many models, and it is
tempting to imitate the latest success. With this proviso, I want to mention a recent flavor of the
day, Vietnam, and "a quintessentially Vietnamese trait: casting around for role models, then trying
 to meld the best aspects of several of them into something uniquely suited to Vietnam" (The
Economist 2008). This suggests that the country's decision makers should listen to everyonethe
 Washington consensus, United Nations agencies, academic experts, journalists, and columnists.
 But they should not slavishly follow any one, not even their own prior dogmatic belief.
Instead, they should study their situation in light of theories and other cases, and then make their  own choice.
As a role model for this, albeit from a very different context, I offer the Arctic and Antarctic
explorer Roald Amundsen, and contrast him with Robert Scott. In 1911, the two were rivals in a
race to be the first human to set foot on the South Pole. In preparation for his journey, Amundsen
used many of the practices he had found among the Netsilik Eskimos during his traverse of the
Northwest Passage some years earlier. He learned dog-sled driving from them, he copied their
leather and fur clothing and the way they iced their sledge runners for smooth traction in very
low temperatures, he brought a large number of Greenlander huskies for his dog teams, and so
on. He combined this with traditional Nordic practices, most notably skiing, and with modern