Market and marketplaces of all kinds also require a certain amount of trust to
gain and keep public support, and clearinghouses that operate under clear rules can
make school assignment transparent even in cities in which school assignments were once widely viewed as corrupt. This role of the school choice clearinghouse in Washington, DC was emphasized by the forced resignation of the school system Chancellor in February 2018, who had earlier in the year asked a Deputy Mayor to transfer the Chancellor’s daughter into a popular high school to which she could not have been assigned according to the rules. ( Note again that market participants can
have large strategy sets that sometimes allow marketplace rules to be circumvented.) However, the existence of formal rules made their violation apparent in this case, and the Mayor quickly demanded and received the resignation of both officials involved, in an attempt to maintain trust in the system ( Stein, Jamison, and Nirappil 2018) .
Because the schools are not strategic players in many cities, the case for requiring
stable matchings is not as compelling as in markets in which stability helps achieve long-term orderly participation in a clearinghouse. Other strategy-proof clearing-house mechanisms have been considered, although seldom adopted.
70

The two main sources of congestion in school choice are in applications, and in
offers and acceptances. When applications are decentralized, it may be hard to learn about schools and how to apply to them, and time consuming to submit many different
applications. (So this is an example in which bringing applications together in a single marketplace can reduce congestion.) And when admissions and acceptances are decentralized, some students are offered multiple positions, and others must wait while they decide. In school choice, congestion can therefore be reduced by making the market thicker so that it includes all schools in a single unified admissions clearinghouse
that gives each student a single offer.

Computerized clearinghouses thus help deal with school choice congestion in
three ways: by bringing together the application process for many schools in a single platform, by using computer speed for processing offers, acceptances, and rejections according to the submitted preference lists, and by asking for those preference lists (and hence acceptance and rejection decisions) in advance, so the process is not
delayed while participants decide on their preferences.

71

To summarize, centrally organized computerized clearinghouses that produce

stable matchings based on preference orderings submitted by market participants have succeeded as a form of market organization in a wide range of medical and