they want to be able to make credible promises in the future (Nakata 2015). The success
of frameworks like inflation targeting—which grant policymakers only “constrained
discretion” (Bernanke and Mishkin 1997)—shows that these reputational
forces can be quite effective. On the other hand, failure to achieve stated targets over
a long period can damage institutional credibility, as shown by the difficulty that the
Bank of Japan has had in raising inflation expectations (Gertler 2017).
Forward guidance in the next downturn will be more effective—better understood,
better anticipated, and more credible—if it is part of a policy framework clearly
articulated in advance. As of this writing, the Federal Reserve is formally reviewing
its policy framework and considering alternatives. Many of these frameworks,
including variants of  price-level targeting and average inflation targeting, involve
the  lower-for-longer or “makeup” policies described earlier. Bernanke, Kiley, and
Roberts (2019), using simulation methods, found that several of the frameworks
under consideration offer substantial promise to improve economic outcomes when
encounters with the lower bound are frequent. Importantly, many of the alternatives
they considered are only mildly  time-inconsistent, involving only modest overshoots
of the inflation target. Moreover, as Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) discussed,
several of these frameworks involve only tweaks to the current  inflation-targeting
framework, which would ease any transition; and their effectiveness is not substantially
reduced if they affect the beliefs and behavior of only financial market participants,
as opposed to the general public. Improving policy and communications
frameworks to incorporate more-systematic forward guidance at the lower bound
should be a high priority for central banks.
C. Other New Monetary Policy Tools
The Federal Reserve supplemented traditional policy with QE and forward guidance
during the  post-crisis period, as did other central banks. But major central
banks outside the United States also used some other tools, which I will discuss
briefly here. As already noted, I will not discuss policy tools aimed primarily at
financial (as opposed to macroeconomic) stabilization.
The alternative tools fell into several major categories. First, unlike the
Fed, which by law was largely limited to purchasing only government bonds or
government-guaranteed MBS, other central banks also purchased a range of private
assets, including corporate debt, commercial paper, covered bonds, and (in the case
of the Bank of Japan) even equities and shares in real estate investment trusts. These
programs likely gave those central banks greater ability to affect private yields, especially
credit spreads, although plenty of evidence suggests spillovers from sovereign
debt purchases to private yields as well (D’Amico and Kaminska 2019). Purchasing
private assets has disadvantages as well: they involve taking credit risk, as well as
the  interest-rate risk associated with all QE programs, and they may generate political
controversies if they create the perception that the central bank is favoring some
firms or industries.
Second, several foreign central banks subsidized bank lending through cheap
long-term funding, usually on the condition that banks increase their lending to
approved categories of borrowers. Leading examples include the Bank of England’s
Funding for Lending Scheme and the ECB’s Targeted  Long-Te