income, something that holds out the hope of measuring the living standards near the bottom of  the distribution around the world.
On the supposition that the Gallup measures provide a useful indication of how people see
their own lives, I conclude by using them to document changes in perceptions from 2006 to
2009, an exercise that, at the least, illustrates the possibility for real-time global monitoring.
In order to use the incomplete 2009 data, and to allow for the fact that not all countries are
included in every year, I estimate a population-weighted year and country model in which the
national average of each indicator is regressed on a set of country dummies and a set of year
dummies, with national population as weights. I do this for the whole world, and for each of the
standard World Bank regions of the world; the average predictions for each year then serve as
the measures of living standards in the aggregate under consideration. The results are shown in
Table 8. For the world as a whole?which, given the population weights, is heavily influenced by
India and China?2007 was a better year than 2006; in 2008, more households reported being
in difficulty and being dissatisfied with their living standards, and these reports were worse still
in 2009. The number without enough money for food continued to fall into 2008, but, like the
difficulty and dissatisfaction measures, was worse in 2009 than in 2008. This pattern varies
somewhat over the other two regions, with South Asia resembling the world as a whole, and
sub-Saharan Africa looking uniformly worse, with 2008 worse than 2007 and 2009 worse still.
Without any other measures, I have no way of cross-checking these numbers, but they are cer
tainly not transparently incorrect. They agree with the poverty rankings in placing sub-Saharan
Africa in a worse position than South Asia on all measures, and they are consistent with nega
tive effects of increases in world food prices in 2007-08, further exacerbated by the effects of
the financial crisis of 2008-09. These effects appear to have been more severe in Africa than
in South Asia.