It solved the problem of misaligned mint-melt intervals for coins of different denominations by,
first, having only one large denomination full weight coin that the mint sold for a precious metal,
and, second, having the government issue difficult-to-counterfeit small denomination token
coins that it promised to convert on demand into the large denomination coin. This required a
technology for manufacturing coins that were difficult to counterfeit.50
As examples of inadvertent experiments, token monies were occasionally issued inside
besieged cities and sometimes they worked. A document that anticipated ideas of John Law,
Adam Smith, and David Ricardo sparked a purposeful experiment. It advised King Ferdinand II
of Spain that he could issue token copper coins that Spanish residents would voluntarily accept
from the government in exchange for full-bodied silver coins. It described how this fiscal boon
to the Spanish treasury could be attained in a noninflationary way.51 Three successive Spanish
kings tried this experiment, which had all of the ingredients of the nineteenth-century stan?
dard formula except convertibility. For 25 years, the experiment worked well, yielding the gov?
ernment substantial revenues without inflation. But eventually excessive issues of copper coins
caused inflation, in the aftermath of which the Spanish monetary authorities pursued a fascinat?
ing sequence of experiments. They repeatedly restamped copper coins and manipulated the unit
of account in order either to adjust the price level or raise revenues for the Spanish government.
The quantity theory can operate only in the limited interval between the mint and meit points
for a precious metal, so a commodity money system conceals the quantity theory. When the
Spanish broke through those restrictions, they gave the British statistician Sir William Petty data
that he used to discover a quantity theory of money (see Charles Henry Hull 1899). Other epi?
sodes created more data that further substantiated the quantity theory of money, for example, the
construction and collapse of John Law's system (see Velde 2007) and the overissuing of French
assignats after the sales of the church lands that had initially backed them were suspended when
war broke out in 1792 (see Sargent and Velde 1995). But the same episodes that lent vivid empiri?
cal support to a quantity theory also brought evidence that government monetary authorities
could not be trusted to administer a pure fiat standard in ways that stabilized prices.52
In 1660, the master of the British mint, Henry Slingsby, added an element missing from the
Spanish experiment, namely, convertibility of token coins, and recommended what in the nine?
teenth century became the standard formula.53 But perhaps because the inflation accompanying
the Spanish and similar experiments had given token coins a bad name, the British government
ignored Slingsby's recommendations. Many experts, including John Locke (1691), continued
to insist that token coins of any denomination were dangerous and that a good faith commod?
ity money system required that coins of all denominations be full bodied. For a long time, that
sentiment convinced national governments not to issue tokens, but other entities created them. In
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Britain, hundreds of private firms and municipalities issued
small denomination tokens that formed a substantial part of the country's coinage. Between 1816
and 1836, the British government implemented the standard formula by nationalizing a token
coin industry that had long existed.
Ricardo's Proposal.?It required 156 years to take the short logical step from Henry Slingsby's
1660 standard formula for issuing convertible token subsidiary coins to David Ricardo's 1816