While the uniform tariff appears to be less targeted than carbon duties, it has a
different purpose. It is primarily designed to increase participation, not to reduce
leakage or improve competitiveness. The rationale is that nonparticipants are damaging
other countries because of their total emissions of greenhouse gases, not only
from those embodied in traded goods.

One objection to this approach is that a tariff on all imports is a major departure
from the approaches authorized under national and international law. It would appear
to collide with current treaties by imposing tariffs on processes and production methods
(PPMs), or on how goods are domestically produced, but that is of course the purpose
of the penalty tariffs. It also departs from the principle of proportionality in having a
binary "in or out" nature of the sanctions. However, the binary feature is central to having
countries focus on two possible policies, and including proportionate tariffs would
lead to a different set of equilibria. While there may be ambiguities as to whether some
esoteric exceptions can be used to justify the system of uniform, nonproportionate tariffs,
trying to shoe-horn the proposed uniform-tariff mechanism into current law seems
ill advised because it would raise questions of legitimacy and durability.

For these reasons, an important aspect of the proposal will be a set of "climate
amendments" to international-trade law, both internationally and domestically.
The climate amendments would explicitly allow uniform tariffs on nonparticipants
within the confines of a climate treaty; it would also prohibit retaliation against
countries who invoke the mechanism. Requiring such amendments would emphasize
that climate change is an especially grave threat, and that this approach should
not be used for every worthy initiative.

F. Tariffs as Internalization Devices

We can interpret penalty tariffs as devices to internalize transnational externalities.
Nations incur but a small fraction of the damages from climate change

domestically - less than 10 percent of global costs on average. Just as taxes or regulations
are needed to correct externalities within nations, some analogous mechanism
is needed for global public goods.

Tariffs on the trade of nonparticipants are a reasonable and realistic tool for internalizing
the transnational externality. How well-targeted are penalty tariffs? Using
the C-DICE model (which is described in the next section), I have examined the
external effects of emissions of each region along with the impacts of the penalty
tariff, and the results are shown in Figure 1.

Here are the calculations. I began with a $25 per ton C02 global social cost of
carbon. I then calculate each region's external SCC. This equals the global SCC
minus the national SCC. In all cases, the external SCC is close to the global SCC.
For example, when the global SCC is $25 per ton, the estimated US external SCC
is $21 per ton. Multiplying the region's external SCC by the difference between the
cooperative and noncooperative emissions provides the externality, shown as the left
bar in Figure 1. In this example, when the United States decides not to participate, it
increases its annual emissions by about 800 million tons, and this produces $16 billion
of additional external damages.

I then calculate the cost from the penalty tariff that a country incurs by not participating
in the Climate Club. The calculation labeled "Cost of
