index. The Federal Reserve Board carries out a quarterly survey of senior loan officers
of banks with respect to lending standards for a variety of types of loans. An
example of a question in the survey is: "Over the past three months, how have your
bank's credit standards for approving applications for credit cards from individuals
or households changed?" The permissible answers are:

1. Tightened considerably,

2. Tightened somewhat,

3. Remained basically unchanged,

4. Eased somewhat, and

5. Eased considerably.

Although the answers are qualitative, it appears possible to create an index of standards
from the answers.

To this end, let xt be an index of lending standards, interpreted as the mean across
banks, where the change in the bank's own index is normal with mean Axt + ii and
unit standard deviation. If a bank's own index change is in the interval [? v,v\,
it reports that its standards "remained basically unchanged." The Federal Reserve
reports the difference in the fraction of banks that reported a tightening of standards
and the fraction that reported a loosening?this is called the net change. It is
(3) Net change = <f>(Axt + \? - v) - <S>(-Axt - ii - v),

where <J> is the standard cumulative normal distribution (see the online Appendix for
details). To estimate the parameter v, I observe that when Axt + ii = 0, that is, when
standards are not changing, the probability of the middle answer is the probability
for [? v, u], which is 2$(v) ? 1. For October 2010, a time of small net change, the
Federal Reserve reports these probabilities, which are around 0.85. The corresponding
value of v is around 1.4.1 calculate the time series for Axt + \i by solving equation
(3) and estimate \i as the mean of the series, in the cases of business loans and
credit cards. The identifying assumption is that Axt has mean zero. For mortgages,
where data are available only for the crisis period, I use a mean of 0.15. My assumption
that the cross-sectional standard deviation across banks is 1.0 amounts to a
normalization of the units of the index.

Figure 9 shows the resulting indexes, the cumulations of the estimated changes.
Because the indexes are constructed to start and end at zero, nothing should be read
into the lack of trend, though it remains a reasonable assumption. Further, because
each of the three indexes starts arbitrarily at zero, but in different years, the relative
values of the indexes have no significance. Standards for business loans track the
business cycle almost perfectly. Each recession saw tightening up to a peak that
occurs around or a little after the trough of the cycle. Then standards began to ease,
gradually during the 1990s and more rapidly in the 2000s. For credit cards, special
factors not relevant for current purposes caused a tightening during the expansion
of the 1990s. Starting from the peak in standards in 2003, credit card standards
behaved similarly to business lending standards. The Federal Reserve added a