unemployment skyrocketed to the 9.5 percent level. Despite concerns that continuing
extreme slack might result in further declines toward deflation, the rate of inflation
has remained remarkably stable at around 1 percent during the recent stable period.
The concept of the non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment or NAIRU
has had a firm grip since Milton Friedman (1968) formulated the concept, though
he called it the natural rate. The idea is that there is a critical unemployment rate
such that inflation will become greater and greater if unemployment is below the
rate. Today, the relevant version is the non-decelerating-inflation rate of unemployment.
 By the theory underlying the concept, the rate of change of prices should fall
more and more if the unemployment rate is above the critical rate. Generally the
NAIRU is found to be around 6 percent. By this influential body of thought, month
after month of unemployment over 6 percent should bring more and more deflation.
Fortunately, the theory is wrong.
It is not news that NAIRU theory is a failure. Robert M. Solow (1990) and Hall
(2005) demonstrate its lack of support in the time-series properties of unemployment.
James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2010) report that the best way to characterize
the relation between inflation and unemployment is to measure downward pressure on
inflation as the difference between the current unemployment rate and the lowest rate
experienced in the previous 11 quarters. Thus, once a slump has lasted 11 quarters at,
say, the same rate, no matter how high, unemployment loses its deflationary effect.
That is exactly the opposite of the NAIRU theory. The finding is plainly consistent
with the data in Figure 12. It's also plainly the case that any negative effect of unemployment
 on inflation is small even during the time when it has any effect.
The limited response of inflation applies at the level of components of output.
Figure 13 shows annual rates of change of output and price for a number of components
 of GDP, over the two-year period from 2007:IV to 2009:IV. The points lie
along a line with a slightly positive slope?the line connecting the left-most observation
 to the right-most has a slope of 0.22 percentage points of price change per
point of output decline. The most informative observation is for residential construction,
 where output declined at a 17 percent annual rate but price declined by only
3.4 percent per year. Construction is a good test case, because existing theories of
sticky prices do not seem to apply to this component.
An adverse shift in the terms of trade may be an influence favoring unresponsive
prices. If an increase in input prices occurs at the same time that product demand
falls, product prices may hardly move at the same time that output falls. A spike in
oil prices occurred in the summer of 2008. But the spike reversed by the end of 2008
and there was no meaningful shift in the terms of trade during the two years included
in Figure 13. The ratio of the price indexes for imports and exports fell by 17 basis
points per year during the period.
Most economic models of pricing derive a reasonably stable markup of price over
cost. The dominant model of inflation embedded in practical macro models today
hypothesizes that firms would like to set prices according to a markup theory, but
only do so at random times. These models are inconsistent with the evidence above,
because they imply that the NAIRU principle holds. They cannot explain the stabilization
 of inflation at positive rates in the presence of long-lasting slack.
The remarkable stability of the rates of change of price indexes conceals the high
volatility and dramatic variations in trends of the prices of individual products. The