highest headcount ratio, a fact that has dominated subsequent discussions of world poverty; prior
to revision, the measured prevalence of poverty in South Asia was substantially higher than in
sub-Saharan Africa. At the time of that revision, I commented that "changes of this size risk
swamping real changes, and it seems impossible to make statements about changes in world pov
erty when the ground underneath one's feet is changing in this way," Deaton (2001). The 2005
revision shifts the ground even more. The global count for 1993 jumps by almost half a billion
people, the headcount ratio for East Asia doubles, there are substantial increases in Africa and
South Asia, and a large reduction in Latin America. The Table shows these numbers for 1993, for
which there are estimates using three sets of PPPs, but there are similar large upward revisions
for more recent years; for example, Shaohua Chen and Martin Ravallion (2010, Table 2) estimate
that for 2005, there were 1,377 million poor people using the latest method. In an earlier version
of the paper, they reported that the number would have been 931 million using the methods in use
prior to the latest ICP revision. The size of the earthquakes seems to be increasing.
Let me emphasize that the general trends in the left-hand side of Table 1 reappear whichever
PPPs and poverty lines are used. The shifting of the ground refers only to the level of global pov
erty, and to its regional distribution. Provided we are prepared to ignore the fact that each new
set of estimates makes the world look like a very different place, the global trends are relatively
secure, although I shall enter some qualifications in Section VI. Given the clear improvement in
the successive ICPs, I would certainly not advocate the retention of outdated and flawed data,
and indeed the ICP is far from the only source of uncertainty in the world poverty measures,
which depend on the timeliness, availability, coverage, design, and quality of national household
surveys, national consumer price indexes, and national accounts. Yet the size of each set of
revisions, and the reasonable presumption that future rounds of the ICP will change the picture
yet again, raises the question of whether the poverty monitoring system is accurate enough and
stable enough to be useful in monitoring progress and for identifying countries and regions
where deprivation is greatest.  The ICP revision in 2005 was associated with a substantial increase in the World Bank's
measure of global poverty. The World Bank's poverty supplement to the World Development
Indicators writes "The new poverty line maintains the same standard for extreme poverty?the
poverty line typical of the poorest countries of the world?but updates it using the latest informa
tion on the cost of living in developing countries. The new data change our view of poverty in the
world. There are more poor people," World Bank (2008b, page 1). The Chief Economist of the
World Bank commented "the sobering news?that poverty is more pervasive than we thoughtmeans
that we should redouble our efforts, especially in sub-Saharan Africa."
Global income inequality also changed with the revision to the ICP. Branko Milanovic (2009),
using household survey data, has estimated that the Gini coefficient of income inequality over
all the citizens of the world rose from 0.65 to 0.70 as a result of the revision. Figure 1 pro
vides another way of looking at the change and shows population weighted inequality across
countries using per capita GDP in PPP dollars as the income measure, what Milanovic calls
"Concept 2" inequality; see also Sudhir Anand and Paul Segal (2008). The figure shows the Gini
coefficient of population weighted per capita national income inequality, and this would be the
global Gini if incomes were equally distributed within countries and the national accounts data
and PPP indexes were correct. For a complete accounting of international income inequality
across households, within country inequality must also be allowed for, although, given the con
flict between national accounts and survey data, with incomes in the latter often growing more
slowly, it is not obvious how to do so. Milanovic uses only survey data and finds little change in
world inequality in recent decades; procedures that use national accounts statistics (NAS) data,
coupled with distributional data from household surveys, find that inequality is declining; see,
for example, Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2009) for a recent example. Neither