Depression, albeit not as severe? Indeed, the name says it all: the Great Recession
narrative, not quite the Great Depression.

XI. Narratives in 2017 and the Outlook for the Economy Today

The narratives from the 2007-2009 financial crisis have faded in our memories,
but are still alive and still relevant. But, for now, the US national attention has shifted
quite dramatically away from that mode of thought.

President-elect Donald J. Trump is a master of narratives. His narratives have
become highly inspirational for some, as was seen by the tens of thousands who
came to his campaign rallies. They have become a source of alarm for others.
His remarkable success in the presidential election campaign last year may be
attributed to, among other things, his public persona from his lifelong effort to promote
himself as a business genius able to make hard decisions and strike deals. An
important reason for his contagion is his reality television show, The Apprentice and
Celebrity Apprentice, which focused lavish attention on Trump. These shows were
such a success that they were copied in numerous other countries each with their
own homegrown Trump substitute, some of whom went on to achieve their own

political success, notably João Doria, elected mayor of São Paulo, Brazil, in 20 16.33
History does not suggest that even a politician as skilled as Trump can actually
control the progression of the narratives he created. The manner in which these narratives
unfold will play an important role in any economic forecast. To best predict
economic activity, we need, among other things, to watch the narratives and ask:
how will the emerging twists in the narratives affect propensity to spend, to start
unconventional new businesses, to hire new employees? In short, how will the animal
spirits be affectedTrump'

s example and admonition to "think big and live large" (Trump and Mclver

2004) appears to provide inspiration to many of his admirers, and that might well
be expected, along with his stimulative tax policy, to boost consumption demand as
well as entrepreneurial zeal. Many people might take the Trump story as a script for
themselves, and thus spend freely and raise their risk tolerance.

But we also have to take into account the Trump detractors, about as many as
his admirers, who may be thinking more along the lines of the morality play of the
1930s. Predicting aggregate demand from the new Trump narratives requires some
careful attention to conflicting narratives.

Incorporating such factors into economic forecasts is not impossible. We would
benefit, however, from more research into understanding the role of narratives in the
economy.

XI. Opportunities for Researchers in Narrative Economics

Narrative economics, to the extent that it has ever been practiced by scholars,
has had a poor reputation. In part, it may be due to the fact that the relation between
narratives and economic outcomes is likely to be complex and time varyin
