was clearly unfortunate. And Robinson’s public persona as a  hard-left polemicist
(Aslanbeigui and Oakes 2009) did not help.

For these and perhaps other reasons,4 by the 1970s the standard  graduate-level
textbooks in microeconomics theory (e.g., Malinvaud 1972) chose to give only a
brief discussion of market power in output markets, and to complete ignore monopsony.
Students of that generation had heard of imperfect competition and market

power in their undergraduate courses, but had almost no formal training in the analytics
of such models.

II. New Theoretical Frameworks

Early analysts (including Robinson and Reynolds) recognized two alternative
explanations for a  less-than-perfectly elastic supply of labor to a given firm: information
frictions and idiosyncratic preferences for different jobs. New models of

optimal search and of the demand for differentiated products that were developed in
the 1970s provided the foundations to formalize these explanations.

A. Search Models

Research in the late 1960s (including McCall 1970 and Mortensen 1970) led to
an elegant theory of optimal search by unemployed workers faced with an exogenous
distribution of potential wage offers. Almost immediately, Diamond (1971)

and Rothschild (1973) noted difficulties with endogenizing the wage offer distribution
in this setting. To sidestep this problem, much of the subsequent literature has
followed the lead of Diamond (1982); Mortensen (1982); and Pissarides (1985) and
switched to a model of search over job match quality (see Pissarides 2010). Since
wages have no allocative role in such models, they are not particularly helpful for
analyzing wage-setting power. The canonical status of these models may have also
led to an  overemphasis on the importance of match effects in wage determination
and labor market dynamics.

An alternative approach, developed by Burdett (1978) and Burdett and Mortensen
(1998) (hereafter BM) is to assume that employed workers also search for better
opportunities.  On-the-job search is empirically important; it also counters an
employer’s temptation to reduce wages for unemployed job seekers to the bare minimum.
BM consider a world where each firm posts a single wage, and can recruit

workers either from unemployment or  lower-paying firms. As Manning (1994,

2003) showed, such a “job ladder” model offers many insights into the links between
worker turnover and wages. It also provides a simple framework for thinking about
the degree of market power of any single employer. Postel Vinay and Robin (2002)
generalized BM by allowing firms to (perfectly) price discriminate against different
workers, depending on their preceding job and any job offers so far. This sequential
auction framework creates a more complex relationship between firm
