capable of changing the rate of inflation under these conditions. Adopting a price
level target as a longer-term formulation of monetary policy has merit, however.
Willem H. Buiter (2009) discusses ideas dating from the Great Depression that
would depress the return on currency during periods of deflation and permit adequately
negative real interest rates. He considers a number of alterations in currency
policy that could have the same effect in a modern economy, such as the abolition
of government-issued currency. None of these policies seems even remotely likely
of adoption.

Tax policies that emulate the effect of low real rates could ameliorate the burden
of high real rates by making current purchasing cheaper than future. A key feature
of these policies is to defer the time when the policy reverses itself until after full
employment prevails. The cash-for-clunkers program in 2009 induced a significant
bulge in car purchases, but because it lasted only a few months, it only deferred
purchases for that many months and did little to shift purchases from a time of
full employment to the present, according to Mian and Sufi (2010a). The effective
program would place a high subsidy on current purchasing and phase out the

subsidy, eventually becoming a consumption tax that financed the earlier subsidy.
The shrinkage rate of the subsidy would amount to a negative real interest rate in
consumer purchasing decisions.

One idea is to phase in a tax that adds to the prices of goods, such as a value-added
tax (Martin Feldstein 2002). The anticipation of higher later prices incorporating
higher tax rates would have the same accelerating effect on spending as a negative
interest rate. Income taxes could be phased out at the same time, with no net budgetary
effect. Britain did this when it joined the European Union at a time when the
resulting inflation was harmful. Now that we need some inflation, the idea looks
better. A second virtue is that a value-added tax is a consumption tax, with well
known efficiency benefits.

For a complete discussion involving a full set of fiscal instruments, but in the specific
context of the New Keynesian model, see Correia et al. (2010).

The most important policy lesson is to prevent the repetition of the poor oversight
of government-protected financial institutions that gave us too much housing, too
many cars, and too much debt during the past decade.

XIII. Concluding Remarks

An economy with a disabled real interest rate is in deep trouble when one type of
spending?homebuilding and consumer durables in the current slump?declines. A
slump will last until the affected spending resumes its normal level. Consequently,
the slump may last many years.

The analysis and calculations in this paper assume that the gradual price adjustment
described by the Phillips curve does not occur. Inflation remains at the same
rate. If inflation declines and turns into growing deflation, the slump will worsen, as
the real interest rate rises. So far in the current slump, notwithstanding episodes of
grave concern, no slide into deflation has occurred.
