Particularly in my discussion of international inequality, I emphasized the difficulties of
making comparisons of real income between countries, especially countries with very differ
ent relative prices and economic structures. The difficulties here may be more than practical
ones, and perhaps we are aiming too high when we try to construct a real income scale on which
every country in the world can be placed. For example, if we look at price indexes for domestic
absorption in the United States and Tajikistan, the ratio of the Laspeyres to the Paasche index is
9.6 (Deaton and Heston, forthcoming, Table 2). This is the same as saying that the ratio of US to
Tajik domestic absorption is 9.6 times as large when measured in US prices as it is when mea
sured in Tajik prices. The use of superlative multilateral price indexes "solves" this discrepancy,
essentially by splitting the (log) difference, but the meaning of such averages is obscure, as we
have seen. None of this challenges the usefulness of comparisons between similar countries,
such as between the United States and Canada, or the members of the OECD. The comparison
between the United States and Tajikistan is perhaps of limited interest, but that is not true of the
United States and China or the United States and India, where the Laspeyres to Paasche ratios
are "only" 1.66 and 1.61. In 1949, Richard Stone wrote "Why do we want to compare the United
States with, say, India or China? What possible interest is there in it? Everybody knows that one
country is, in economic terms, very rich and another country very poor; does it matter whether
the factor is thirty or fifty or what?" and went on to conclude that "I do not expect a very rapid
resolution of the intellectual problems of making welfare comparisons between widely differ
ent communities." While Stone certainly did not anticipate the major developments in the ICP
over the last 60 years, his words may have been prophetic, though he would probably have been
well satisfied with the range of 1.66 or 1.61 to 1 that we get for India and China. Yet even these
margins of uncertainty ignore the other problems of the ICP, such as the treatment of housing,
of the productivity of government services, of urban bias in pricing, and the question of what we
are doing when we match specifications so carefully.

More formally than Stone, but along the same lines, Amartya Sen (1973, 1976) has suggested
that we not try to make complete orderings between countries, let alone compute the ratio-scale
real income numbers on which poverty and inequality comparisons rest. Instead, he argued for
establishing the partial orderings that can be obtained from pairwise comparisons of countries,
establishing that one is richer than the other, or cannot be ranked, using the value of each coun
try's commodity vector at the other country's prices. This is a line of research that could usefully
be reopened using the data from the ICP.

At the same time, it is clear that PPP comparisons between broadly similar countries, for
example within regions, are on relatively firm ground and may be sufficient to support cross
country regressions within subsets of the world, if not for all countries pooled together. PPPs for
the poorer countries in Africa or in Asia may be good enough to support global poverty counts,
at least provided the uncertainties are recognized. Probably the most urgent area for the poverty
counts is not the ICP, but the improvement in the consistency and timeliness of household sur
veys, and the upgrading of national accounts. We have come a long way since Simon Kuznets
(1955) apologized in his Presidential Address to the Association for "the meagerness of reliable
information presented," but there is still much to be done. It is also clear that more use should
be made of monitoring surveys, such as the Gallup World Poll, at least as supplementary infor
mation, and that the UN and the World Bank would do well to use them in their assessment of
progress towards targets such as the Millennium Development Goals.

What about the poverty count that has been a running theme of this lecture? I have shown that
the recent 50 percent increase in the counts had very little to do with revisions to the ICP, and
nothing at all to do with the fact that the ICP made the developing world as a whole uniformly