with more realistic assumptions. Several empirical studies have examined
the structure of coalitions or international agreements using a variety of alternative
cooperative structures and coalition assumptions. A brief description of key studies
is contained in the online Appendix.
The central results of existing studies reproduce the finding of the small coalition
paradox. Without penalties on nonparticipants, stable coalitions tend to be small and
have emissions reductions that are close to the noncooperative level. In addition,
many studies find that coalitions tend to be unstable, particularly if transfers among
regions are included.
IV. Sanctions on Nonparticipants to Promote an Effective Climate Club
As noted above, the syndrome of free-riding along with the international norm
of voluntary participation appears to doom international climate agreements like the
Kyoto Protocol. The suggestion in this paper is that a club structure - where external
sanctions are imposed on nonmembers - will be necessary to induce effective agreements.
I analyze in depth a specific model of sanctions (tariffs on nonparticipants),
but the model illustrates the more general point that external sanctions are necessary
to promote participation in effective agreements to provide global public goods.
A. Stable Coalitions
While it is easy to design potential international climate agreements, the reality
is that it is difficult to construct ones that are effective and stable. Effective means
abatement approaching the global optimum. The concept of stability used here is
denoted as a coalition Nash equilibrium . Under this definition, a coalition is stable
if no group (sub-coalition) among the countries can improve its welfare by changing
its status. That is, it combines individual rationality (for each player individually),
collective rationality (for all players together), and coalition rationality (for each
subset of the players). This is a natural extension of a Nash equilibrium, which
applies to single countries. The concept is widely used in different fields and was
originally called strong equilibrium in Aumann (1959); also see Bernheim, Peleg,
and Whinston (1987). The term coalition Nash is more intuitive and is used here.
The small coalition paradox motivates the current approach. The goal here is
to find a structure that is stable and effective for a wide variety of country preferences,
technologies, and strategies. The most appealing structure is one that does
not depend on sophisticated and fragile repeated-game strategies and instead has
an efficient equilibrium for every period (in the stage games) in a repeated game.
I therefore focus on one-shot games that have efficient and unique equilibria. If
these are then turned into a repeated game, each of the one-shot games will be a
sub-game-perfect coalition Nash equilibrium, and the repeated game will have an
efficient coalition-Nash equilibrium.
B. Transfers Undermine Coalition Stability
The present study assumes that there is no sharing of the gains from cooperation
among members of the coalition. In some cases, particularly those with asymme