is properly taken into account, conditions for existence and uniqueness of the price
level in dynamic general equilibrium were different from what they seemed in
conventional models. They may also have seemed esoteric—they questioned con
ventional analysis most strongly in policy configurations that in the 1990s seemed
unlike any observed in rich economies in recent history.2
This paper tries to bring FTPL down to earth. It begins by citing some results from
FTPL analysis and showing how they apply to current policy discussions. It then
presents a couple of simple models illustrating FTPL, using them to make clear how
the results used earlier in the paper arise and to refute some of the objections to and
fallacies concerning FTPL that still circulate among economists.
II. Insights from FTPL and Their Application
A. Monetary Policy Actions, to be Effective,
Must Induce a Fiscal Policy Response
This is easiest to understand in high-inflation, high nominal debt economies where
fiscal policy is frozen by political deadlock or chicanery. In such an economy, the
interest rate will be high, and with a high level of debt, the interest expense com
ponent of the budget is substantial, possibly even dominant. If inflation rises still
higher, the usual monetary policy prescription would be for the policy interest rate
to increase, by even more than the rise in the inflation rate.3 But if the legislature
in such an economy is gridlocked, the central bank may realize that an interest rate
increase will pass right through the government budget, with an increased rate of
issue of nominal debt the only fiscal effect of the interest rate rise. If this is indeed
the situation, and private sector bond buyers understand the situation, the interest
rate rise will have no contractionary effect. Indeed, it will increase the rate of infla
tion rather than decrease it. The central bank, understanding this, may then forgo
following the conventional policy prescription. In doing so, it is not accelerating the
inflation, it is damping it.4
In the 1990s, this may have seemed an analysis that applied at most to some mis
managed Latin American economies, but consider the reasoning many economists
(including me) have used to argue that the great expansion of the balance sheet of
the US Federal Reserve system in the last four years need not generate inflationary
pressure. The Fed now has the authority to pay interest on reserve balances. While
the rates are now low (though still in excess of rates on short term US Treasury
Bills), the Fed is free to raise them if inflationary pressures arise. Even if it under
takes no open market operations to change the amount of reserves, raising the rates
on reserves would have a powerful contractionary effect. Banks would have little
incentive to expand their lending if perfectly safe reserve deposits paid interest at a
rate comparable to loan rates.