economic regions. These are, admittedly, only a heuristic device for ease of interpre
tation, but the aggregation used here captures about 85 percent of the variability in
the raw data on wage rates.11 The year 2007 was selected both because the sample of
countries for which data were collected was expanded in that year, but also because
the financial crisis that affected many countries had not yet begun.
The ñrst column of Table 3 contains the wage rate for a McDonald s crew mem
ber in US dollars (at then-current exchange rates), while the third column contains
the price of a Big Mac (again in US dollars). For ease of comparison, the second
column expresses the McWage in the economic region indicated relative to its value
in the United States. Finally, the fourth column contains the ratio of the price of a
Big Mac to the McWage (that is, it contains the measure of Big Macs per hour of
work, BMPH).
There are three obvious, dramatic conclusions that it is easy to draw from the com
parison of wage rates in Table 3. First, the developed countries, including the United
States, Canada, Japan, and Western Europe have quite similar wage rates, whether
measured in dollars or in BMPH. In these countries a worker earned between two
and three Big Macs per hour of work, and with the exception of Western Europe with
its highly regulated wage structure, earned around $7 an hour. A second conclusion
is that the vast majority of workers, including those in India, China, Latin America,
and the Middle East, earned about 10 percent as much as the workers in developed
countries, although the BMPH comparison increases this ratio to about 15 percent,
as would any PPP adjustment. Finally, workers in Russia, Eastern Europe, and
South Africa face wage rates about 25 to 35 percent of those in the developed coun
tries, although again the BMPH comparison increases this ratio somewhat. In sum,
the data in Table 3 provide transparent and credible evidence that workers doing
the same tasks and producing the same output using identical technologies are paid
vastly different wage rates. As we shall see, a straightforward explanation of these
vast wage differences attributes them almost entirely to differences in the total factor
productivity in these countries, not to differences in skill or human capital.
Table 4 shows measures of hypothetical total factor productivity for each eco
nomic region relative to the United States. The first column of the table provides a
measure of TFP using the method proposed by Hall and Jones (1999), but which I
have updated to 2007 using the data in the Penn World Table 7.0. The Hall-Jones
method is based on adjusting output per man for (i) differences in schooling levels
of the work force and (ii) capital/output ratios, but I have here assumed capital/
output ratios are the same in all countries. The second column shows the results of
using equation (2) to measure the hypothetical TFP with the relative wage of work
ers in McDonald's restaurants.
It is apparent from Table 4 that for a vast part of the world, the measures of TFP
based on wage rates are remarkably similar to those based on output accounting
measures. This is not surprising given the high correlation between the McWage
data and output per man hour indicated in Figure 8 and the key role that output
per man hour plays in the calculation of conventional TFP measures. Given the
potential for error in these calculations, however, the similarity of these estimates