potential employers (based on industry or occupation), how they count employment
(based on the stock of employment, the number of job openings, or some
transition-probability-adjusted stock of employment), and whether they use a purely
observational approach, or implement a research design that isolates some exogenous
component of the local HHI. Despite these differences, most recent studies
seem to show a negative effect of higher concentration on wages, with elasticities
between the HHI and wages on the order of −0.05 to −0.15.
For example, Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum (2022) use data from a large
national employment website to study the relationship between posted wages for
jobs in a given occupation and CZ and the HHI of employers listing vacancies in
that occupation and location. They find smaller elasticities of posted wages with
respect to the HHI in simple ordinary least squares (OLS) models, but larger elasticities
when they instrument the HHI with the  leave-out mean number of competitors
searching for workers in that same occupation in other markets. Rinz (2020)
estimates HHIs from counts of  establishment-level employment by CZ and industry,
then relates these to administrative earnings from tax data. In OLS models he finds
that wages are slightly higher in more concentrated markets, but in models that use
the  leave-out mean of the HHI for the same industry in other locations as an instrumental
variable, he obtains negative elasticities in the range of Azar, Marinescu, and
Steinbaum (2022).
Recent studies by Arnold (2020) and Prager and Schmidt (2021) use event study
designs to look at the effects of merger and acquisition activity on local HHIs
and wages. In my opinion, these designs provide the best available evidence that
employer consolidations that raise the HHI have significant negative effects on
wages, at least for workers who are highly attached to the affected industry.14
D. Conspiracies and Other Arrangements to Suppress Competition
Adam Smith (2003, p.94-95) wrote that employers “are always and everywhere
in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of
labor above their actual rate.”15 He also noted, however, that “(w)e seldom, indeed,
hear of this combination, because it is the usual, and one may say, the natural state
of things, which nobody ever hears of.” While discoveries of employer collusion are
still relatively rare, in the past two decades there have been a number of lawsuits
and public disclosures that provide the details of some agreements to suppress competition.
These provide a useful perspective on the mechanisms generating market
power for employers.
The  best-known lawsuit concerned “no poaching” and “no solicitation” agreements
affecting software and animation engineers in Silicon Valley (see Ashenfelter
et al. forthcoming for more details).16 The agreement originated in the  mid-1980s
when Lucasfilm sold its computer animation division to Steve