Some newspapers did offer a straightforward interpretation of the high oil prices:
temporary supply disruptions in Russia and Mexico because of unrest there. But,
another explanation had a higher contagion rate. High oil prices were then attributed
to strong demand at a time when automobiles and other energy-intensive devices
were proliferating despite the Depression. An article by W. W. Woods in the Los
Angeles Times in September 1920 said: "In the last two years the growing appetite
of the internal combustion engine for gasoline has been more than six times what
it was in 1901." He concluded that the nation's oil supply would be exhausted in
18 years. Moreover, coal prices were high in late 1920, and retail stores of coal for
home furnaces were reportedly exhausted as winter approached. Clayton (2015)
documents the history of this narrative, from Teddy Roosevelt's 1908 White House
conference on exhaustion of resources, to even more dire predictions by May 1920
from David White, chief geologist at the USGS, that oil production would peak
"probably within five years and possibly in three years." (In fact, new oil discoveries
quickly brought the price of oil down after 1920.)

All of these events - World War, the influenza epidemic, the race riots, the Big
Red Scare, the oil shock - were associated with hugely unsettling narratives that
could have led to a sense of economic uncertainty that might have discouraged
discretionary spending of households and slowed down hiring decisions of firms
around the world. These certainly sound like more significant potential causes than
New York Fed President Benjamin Strong's decision to take a cruise when he was
needed.

There were also more subtle narratives that might have brought on the recession.
A story was afloat in 1920 that the Consumer Price Index would eventually come
back down to its level in 1913, just before World War I. Not everyone expected
this of course, but, obviously, with such deflation expectations, many would think
one should wait to buy until prices fell, but large numbers of people waiting to buy
brought on a depression. For those with such deflation expectations, the expected
real interest rate was super high. Not a single newspaper represented by ProQuest
News and Newspapers made any reference at all to real interest rates during this
depression, even though the concept of the real interest rate had been introduced to
economists by John Bates Clark (1895). The concept of real interest rate just had
not gone viral yet (and you might say it still hasn't). But many people certainly
understood why they should postpone buying and avoid borrowing when massive
deflation is expected.

In 1913 in the United States, a retail price index, predecessor to the Consumer
Price Index (CPI), attracted great attention. The CPI that we have now began with a
base value of 10 in 1913. By 1920, the index had doubled to 20, and by mid-1921 it
had fallen to 17. The price increase between the end of the war and 1920 was widely
blamed on people who were labeled with the newly popular word "profiteer." The
Oxford English Dictionary gives first use of the word profiteer as occurring in 1912,
but its use did not take off until late in World War I and after. None of the usual
synonyms for profiteer (racketeer, exploiter, black marketer, bloodsucker, vampire)
seem to have the same meaning and association with wartime fortune building at the
expense of war heroes. The word is a play on the much older word privateer, meaning
a pirate who has the support of a hostile government. Wartime narratives spread
of customers angry at high prices chastising their milkmen and telling their butch