Obviously the typical monthly members have an arbitrage opportunity available.
Why pay $17 a visit when they could be paying $10? One possible explanation
for this behavior is that customers understand that they are affected by sunk costs
(whether or not they realize it is a fallacy) and are strategically using the membership
fee as a (rather ineffective) commitment device to try to induce more frequent gym
usage. Let's suppose that explanation is correct. What could a competing gym do to
both make more money and reduce or eliminate the less than fully rational behavior
of their clients? It would certainly not be a great strategy to explain to customers
that they could save a lot of money by switching to the 10-ticket package. Not only
would the gym be losing money on a per visit basis, but they would also forego the
payments from infrequent gym users who procrastinate about quitting. The average
person who quits has not been to the gym in 2.3 months. So if competing gyms
can't make money by turning them into Econs, who can? I suppose Della Vigna and
Malmendier could have started a service convincing people to switch to paying by
the visit, but I think they made a wise career choice in selecting academia over per-
sonal finance consulting.
The same analysis applies to the recent financial crisis. Many homeowners took
out mortgages with initial low "teaser rates." Once the rates reset, some homeowners
found they were unable to pay their mortgage payments unless home prices contin-
ued to go up and mortgage refinancing remained available at low interest. The mort-
gage lenders who initiated such mortgages and then immediately sold the loans to
be securitized made lots of money while it lasted, but the subsequent financial crisis
was painful to nearly everyone. Let's assume that at least some of these mortgage
borrowers were fooled by fast-talking mortgage brokers.4 How would the market
solve this problem? No one has ever gotten rich convincing people not to take out
unwise mortgages.
Similarly if people fail to follow the dictates of the life-cycle hypothesis and fail
to save adequately for retirement, how is the market going to help them? Yes, there
are firms selling mutual funds but they are competing with other firms selling fast
cars, big screen televisions, and exotic vacations. Who is going to win that battle?
The bottom line is there is no magic market potion that miraculously turns Humans
into Econs; in fact, the opposite pattern is more likely to occur, namely that markets
will exacerbate behavioral biases by catering to those preferences.
The conclusion one should reach from this section is that the explainawaytions
are not a good excuse to presume that agents will behave as if they were Econs.
Instead we need to follow Milton Friedman's advice and evaluate theories based on
the quality of their predictions, and, if necessary, modify some of our theories.
III. Financial Markets3
A good place to start in an evaluation of the potential importance of
less-than-fully-rational agents is financial markets. I say this because financial mar-
kets have the features that should make it hardest to find evidence of misb