likely to meet in the future. In equilibrium there is a threshold of distance such that pairs located
within this distance play honestly and those located farther apart cheat.
If the circle is small enough, honesty may be achievable over all of it. The left-hand circle is of
the critical size, where an agent located at O is just indifferent between honesty and cheating if
he happens to be matched with P located diametrically opposite. The right-hand circle is slightly
larger. The distances OPx and OP2 along the shorter arcs are exactly equal to the critical distance
OP (measured either way) in the left-hand circle, but there are added people in the short arc PXP2.
Now if O meets Px and cheats, the probability that P2 gets to hear of this is strictly less than one,
whereas in the left-hand circle the probability that someone just to one side of P would get to
hear of O's cheating another agent just to the other side of P was almost equal to one. Therefore
?'s indifference when playing someone at the distance OP in the left circle changes to favoring
cheating someone at equal distance OPx (or OP2) in the larger right circle.
By continuity, O will also cheat people located slightly closer than Px (or P2). Enlargement
of the circle beyond the critical size actually shrinks the distance over which honesty can be
achieved!8
D. Private External Enforcement
In my classification, third-party institutions provide governance by outsiders who are not
direct parties to this class of transactions. This works in several different ways: (1) private adju?
dication and enforcement under the shadow of formal law; (2) provision of information that then
becomes an input to second-party enforcement; and (3) enforcement for profit by the third party.
Industry-based arbitration forums mentioned above are an example of the first. Gambetta's Don
Peppe acts in the second as well as the third of the categories. He can provide one or both of
two types of services. In an information role, he keeps track of the behavior of all traders in his
area and tells his customers whether the others with whom they are proposing to do business
have good reputations; in this aspect he is like a credit-rating agency. In an enforcement role, he
inflicts punishment, including (especially) physical violence, on those who cheat his clients; in