the new monetary tools appears able (based on the simulations) largely to overcome
the effects of the lower bound on  short-term rates, adding about 3 percentage points
of policy space. If the assumed nominal neutral rate is much lower than 2 percent
or so, simulations of FRB/US (see online Appendix) continue to show substantial
benefits from using the new monetary tools, relative to baseline policies that make
no use of these tools. However, in this case the losses for all policies are greater than
those of the (hypothetical) unconstrained policy, implying that even active use of
the new tools cannot compensate for the constraint of the lower bound. Moreover,
for very low nominal neutral rates, simulations of all policies—both traditional and
those employing the new monetary tools—show the economy spending a large fraction
of the time at the lower bound, and with  longer-term interest rates frequently
in negative territory, reflecting negative term premiums. For any given policy, these
adverse outcomes are much less likely in the simulations when the neutral rate is in
the  2–3 percent range.23
A finding that  long-term rates are frequently negative in the simulations is a concern,
for several reasons. First, as noted earlier, if bond market participants believe
that the lower bound on  short-term rates is zero, then they may be unwilling to
hold  longer-term bonds yielding less than zero (Grisse, Krogstrup, and Schumacher
2017). Thus, at least for the United States and other jurisdictions that have indicated
that they are unlikely to use negative  short-term rates, simulations that assume
that  longer-term rates can be negative may overstate the amount of stimulus that is
attainable in practice. Second, interest rates that are zero or negative much of the
time raise concerns about financial instability and other risks, as discussed earlier.
Thus, although it remains true that the new monetary tools add policy space when
the nominal neutral rate is below 2 percent or so, in that range none of the policy
approaches considered here can be thought fully satisfactory.
What is the best estimate of the nominal neutral rate? Sufficient conditions for the
nominal neutral rate to be in the  2–3 percent range assumed here are that inflation
expectations be close to the 2 percent target and that the real neutral rate be at least
zero. Both conditions are consistent with most estimates for the United States. For
example, as of this writing, all 17 FOMC participants reporting in the Fed’s Summary
of Economic Projections have provided estimates of the  long-run nominal policy
rate between 2.0 and 3.3 percent (with a median of 2.5 percent), implying a real
neutral rate between 0 and 1.3 percent (median 0.5 percent). Surveys of professional
forecasters and primary dealers provide similar values (Joergensen and Meldrum
2019). The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, using the methods of Laubach and
Williams (2003), reports a current estimate of the real neutral rate above 0.9 percent,
implying a nominal neutral rate close to 3.0 percent. Alternatively, using estimates
from the term structure model of Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013), the New
York Fed reports a  10-year average expected short rate, a proxy for the nominal
neutral rate, of 2.8 percent. Combining macroeconomic and term structure data,
Davis, Fuenzalida, and Taylor (2019) obtains estimates close to those of L