fluctuations. We cannot easily prove that any association between changing narratives
and economic outcomes is not all reverse causality, from the outcomes to the
narratives. But there have been true controlled experiments showing that people
respond strongly to narratives, in the fields of marketing (Escalas 2007); journalism
(Machill, Köhler, and Waldhauser 2007 ); education (McQuiggan et al. 2008);
health interventions (Slater et al. 2003); and philanthropy (Weber et al. 2006).
My goal in this paper is to describe what we know about narratives and the penchant
of the human mind to be engaged by them, to consider reasons to expect
that narratives might well be thought of as important, largely exogenous shocks to
the aggregate economy. This address extends some earlier work I have done with
George Akerlof (Akerlof and Shiller 2009, 2015) and some of my own earlier work
going back decades (Shiller 1984), but develops the analysis and captures a much
broader relevant literature.
Of course, almost nothing beyond spots on the sun is truly exogenous in economics,
but new narratives may be regarded often as causative innovations, since each
narrative originates in the mind of a single individual (or a collaboration among a
few). Mokyr (2016) calls such an individual a "cultural entrepreneur," and traces
the concept back to Hume (1742) who wrote that "what depends on a few persons
is, in great measure, to be ascribed to chance, or secret and unknown causes; what
arises from a great number may often be accounted for by determinate and known
causes."1
I will present here some thoughts on these effects of a "few persons" and offer
a class of mathematical models for some of these determinate and known causes
of the path of narratives, quantifying the dynamics of narratives, and will consider
how our understanding can be enhanced of major economic events: the Depression
of 1920-1921, the Great Depression of the 1930s, the Great Recession of 2007-
2009, and our present time right after our narrative-filled 2016 US presidential
election.
I use the term narrative to mean a simple story or easily expressed explanation
of events that many people want to bring up in conversation or on news or social
media because it can be used to stimulate the concerns or emotions of others, and/
or because it appears to advance self-interest. To be stimulating, it usually has some
human interest either direct or implied. As I (and many others) use the term, a narrative
is a gem for conversation, and may take the form of an extraordinary or heroic
tale or even a joke. It is not generally a researched story, and may have glaring
holes, as in urban legends. The form of the narrative varies through time and across
tellings, but maintains a core contagious element, in the forms that are successful
in spreading. Why an element is contagious, when it may even "go viral," may be
hard to understand, unless we reflect carefully on the reason people like to spread
the narrative. Mutations in narratives spring up randomly, just as in organisms in
evolutionary biology, and when they are contagious, the mutated narratives generate
seemingly unpredictable changes in the economy.
Narratives can be based on varying degrees of truth. Wishful thinking may
enhance contagion (Bénabou 2013). The impact of nonfactual narrat