important. However, continuing to focus on governance institutions, we next ask whether these
institutions can evolve toward more efficient forms, and whether and how they can be reformed.
As regards a natural process of evolution, scholars have expressed contrasting views.
Williamson's "discriminating alignment hypothesis" (1996,12) holds that transactions align with
governance structures to minimize transaction costs; in other words, there is a natural tendency
toward more efficient structures that match institutions to the needs of governance. Douglass
North (1990) argues that such alignment may fail to occur, emphasizing obstacles presented by
the political process of reform.
Discriminating alignment can work well and reasonably quickly when the decision is made
by one actor, or by a small group with common interests. Williamson's (1985, chap. 4, 5) classic
analysis of vertical integration choices by firms is a case in point. Robert Ellickson (1991) and
Gary Libecap (1989, chap. 3) have cases where small groups quickly established and enforced
private order for property rights.9
But institutions constitute an equilibrium, and institutional change means shifting to a new
equilibrium. In any moderately complex social context, this requires (1) either compensating
those who would lose from the change or overcoming their resistance in the existing political
process; (2) changing information and aligning incentives; and (3) creating common knowledge
of actions to sustain the new equilibrium. All these steps present difficulties; therefore the pro?
cess of institution reform is often slow, and old institutions may persist as a lock-in phenomenon.
Thrainn Eggertson (2005) gives a striking example of how an Icelandic institution of sharing of
hay persisted for more than a century and prevented an efficient reallocation of resources away
from farming and toward fishing. Some of Libecap's other cases (1989, chap. 4-6) also present a  mixed record of success and failure.
One important desideratum for shifting an institutional equilibrium is that the new institu?
tions interact well, not dysfunctionally, with existing ones, and case studies support this. Here
are some examples. (1) Everyone emphasizes the importance of secure property rights, and in
the case of land, formal titling seems the best way to define these. But Frank Shipton (1988) and
Jean Ensminger (1997) show how titling in Kenya failed in its aims because existing informal
rights could not be overridden; for example, land to which you have formal title cannot be used as
collateral for borrowing if traditional institutions give your extended family some rights to shares
in the product of the land. (2) Daniel Berkowitz, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard
(2003) found that success of attempts to transplant legal systems to new countries depended
significantly on whether the population in the recipient country already had familiarity with
the basic principles of the transplanted law. (3) Rachel Kranton and Anand Swamy (1999) show
how arm's length market arrangements for bank lending in India destroyed existing relational
arrangements that served other useful aims, such as insurance. (4) Dixit (2004, chap. 2) shows
theoretically how a partial improvement in a weak system of formal governance can worsen
the performance of the existing system of informal relational governance, by making the con?
sequences of cheating less harmful. These examples also show that when making institutional
reforms that are expected to lead to eventual improvements, it may be necessary to accept some
transitional worsening of performance.
These studies have also given us a few broad generalizations about successful institutional
change. (1) The government has an important role as partner and facilitator of reforms. But top
down reforms may be difficult to achieve because of lack of adequate local knowledge and lack
of appropriate incentives for the existing administrative structures to reform themselves; there?
fore the results may be disappointing (Easterly 2008; Rodrik 2008). (2) A major entrepreneur