American Economic Review 2022, 112(4): 1075–1090  
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.112.4.1075
1075Who Set Y our Wage?†
By David Card*
I discuss the recent literature that has led to new interest in the 
idea of monopsonistic wage setting. Building on advances in search 
theory and in models of differentiated products, researchers have 
used a number of different strategies to identify the elasticity of 
 firm-specific labor supply. A growing consensus is that firms have 
some  wage-setting power, though many questions remain about the 
sources of that power. (JEL B21, D21, D24, D43, J22, J31, J42)
In the textbook model of labor markets—synthesized by Hicks (1932)—product 
and factor markets are perfectly competitive and wages are equated to marginal prod-
ucts.1 Just one year after Hicks, Robinson (1933) developed an alternative framework 
for understanding  firm-specific wage setting and coined the term “monopsony.” The 
book attracted a lot of attention, and at least some labor economists were enthusi-
astic. Reynolds (1946, p. 390) wrote that the concept of an  upward-sloping supply 
curve of labor to the firm “… has made its way rapidly into the textbooks and seems 
well on its way to being generally accepted as a substitute for the horizontal supply 
curve of earlier days.” But Reynolds’s prediction was premature. By the 1960s the 
concept of monopsony had been relegated to discussions of company towns. Indeed, 
in the preface to the second edition to her book, Robinson (1969) observed, “All this 
had no effect. Perfect competition, supply and demand … and marginal products 
still reign supreme in orthodox teaching.”
At the risk of following too closely in Reynolds’s footsteps, in this paper I will 
try to make the case that the time has come to recognize that many—or even most—
firms have some  wage-setting power. Such a shift was made with respect to firm’s 
 price-setting power many decades ago. Economists now routinely accept that the 
prices of products like gasoline, breakfast cereal, and ketchup are set with some 
degree of market power, even in  online markets. In the past few years we may have 
reached a tipping point for a similar transition in labor economics, driven by the 
combination of new (or at least  post-1930) theoretical perspectives, newly available 
data sources, and accumulating evidence on several different fronts.
1 Hicks (1932) also introduced the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital and corrected an error in 
“Marshall’s rules” describing the  industry-level elasticity of labor demand.* UC Berkeley (email: card@berkeley.edu). Prepared for the 2022 Annual Meeting of the American Economic 
Association. I am grateful to Orley Ashenfelter, Alan Manning, and Pat Kline for helpful discussions over many 
years on the topic of this paper, and to Laura Giuliano for comments on an early draft.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.112.4.1075 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.