its total purchases in response to economic developments. The European Central
Bank faced political and legal opposition to asset purchases and undertook its first
large QE program in pursuit of monetary policy objectives only in January 2015.
Variants of QE have been employed by smaller economies, including Sweden and
Switzerland.
The types of assets purchased varied considerably by central bank. Facing tighter
legal constraints than most of its peers, the Fed was able to purchase only Treasury
securities and securities issued by the GSEs, which by late 2008 were fully backed
by the federal government. Other central banks had wider authorities, and to varying
degrees bought not only government debt but also corporate bonds, covered bonds
issued by banks, and even equities.
In the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis, the relative lack of experience
with QE created substantial uncertainty about how effective asset purchases would
be in easing financial conditions, if they would help at all. Indeed, some benchmark
models predict that asset purchases will have no or at best transient effects on asset
prices (Eggertsson and Woodford 2003). The positive case for QE rested on two
arguments. First, if investors have “preferred habitats” because of specialized exper -
tise, transaction costs, regulations, liquidity preference, or other factors, then chang-
ing the net supplies of different securities or classes of securities should affect their
relative prices. This portfolio balance effect was modeled formally by Vayanos and
Vila (2009), who showed that, generally, the effect will not be undone by the efforts
of arbitrageurs. US policymakers saw QE as working in part by removing dura-
tion risk from the Treasury market, pushing investors to bid up the values of both
remaining  longer-term Treasuries and close substitutes, such as  mortgage-backed
securities and corporate bonds. In addition, MBS purchases were expected to reduce
the spread between Treasury yields and mortgage rates.
Second, QE may have a signaling effect if it serves as a commitment mechanism,
or perhaps as a signal of seriousness, leading investors to believe that policymak-
ers intend to keep  short-term policy rates low for an extended period. Although
several channels have been proposed for how this might work, in practice much of
the signaling effect appears tied to investors’ beliefs about the likely sequencing of
policies. With encouragement from policymakers, market participants are typically
confident that central banks will not raise  short-term interest rates so long as asset
purchases are continuing. Since QE announcements typically include information
about the likely duration of purchases, which may be measured in quarters or years,
and since QE programs are rarely terminated prematurely (because of the likely
costs to policymakers’ credibility), the initiation or extension of a QE program often
pushes out the expected date of the first  short-term rate increase. Observing this
signal that short rates will be kept low, investors bid down  longer-term rates as well.
Longer-term yields can be conceptually divided into (i) the average expected
short rate over the life of the security, and (ii) the difference between the total yield
and the average expected short rate, known as the term premium. To a first approx-
imation, portfolio balance effects work by affecting the term premium, while the
signaling effect works by influencing expectations of future short rates. Using that
approximation to distinguish the portfolio balance and signaling channels is not
straightforward, however, because term premiums and expected future short rates are
not directly observable. There are also indirect effects to account for: for  example,