without external penalties, that is, ones that have self-contained payoffs and cannot
be enforced by third parties or be linked to other arrangements.

Begin with some definitions. The formal difference between "external" and "internal"
penalties is the following. If countries are playing a repeated game, then internal
penalties maintain the payoff structure of the game, but countries can penalize or
reward others by selecting different combinations of strategies. Tit-for-tat is a game
with internal penalties because it has a reward structure given by the payoffs of the
stage games. In the end, however, the rewards must be some combination of the payoffs
of the original game. By contrast, external penalties change the payoff structure of the
game. A standard external penalty comes when a player imposes a sanction that derives
from a trading relationship that is unconnected to the payoffs of the original game. For
example, in a treaty to preserve whales, a player might punish an uncooperative party
by imposing a duty on the imports of related products. The tariffs are unrelated to the
public-goods nature of the decline of the whale population and are therefore external.
Before turning to the analysis of coalitions, it will be useful to distinguish between
"bottom-up" and "top-down" coalitions. The standard approach in environmental
economics, reviewed in the next section, focuses on a bottom-up approach in which
coalitions optimize their own self-interest and evolve into larger or smaller coalitions.
Regional trade agreements are examples of this approach.

The Climate Club approach is instead a top-down approach. Here, the regime is
optimized to attract large numbers of participants and attain high levels of abatement,
and then countries decide whether or not to join. The Bretton Woods institutions
such as the International Monetary Fund or the World Trade Organization are
examples of the top-down model.

B. Bottom-up Coalitions and the Small Coalition Paradox

In the context of climate change, coalitions of countries can form treaties that
potentially improve the welfare of their members by taking concerted action. If several
countries maximize their joint welfare, the optimized level of abatement will rise
relative to the noncooperative equilibrium because more countries will benefit. In
the algebraic example described above, the coalition's optimal control rate shown in
equation (2) will equal the global optimum times the coalition's share of world output.
As the coalition increases to include all countries, the global level of abatement
will tend toward the efficient rate. This result might form the basis for hopes that
arrangements like the Kyoto Protocol will lead to deep emissions reductions.
In fact, theoretical and empirical studies indicate that bottom-up coalitions for cartels
and global public goods tend to be small, fragile, and unstable. Work on coalition stability
by Hart and Kurz (1983) found that coalitions are generally not stable, and their
structure will depend upon the structure of the payoffs and the stability concept. Studies
of the structure of cartels in oligopoly theory (see, e.g., D'Aspremont et al. 1983 and
Donsimoni, Economides, and Polemarchakis 1986) found that cartels are likely to be
small, unstable, or of vanishingly small importance as the number of firms grows.
Studies in environmental economics and climate change find virtually universally
that coalitions tend to be either small or shallow, a result I will call the "small
coalition paradox." The paradigm for understanding the small coalition paradox is
well discussed in Barrett's (2003) book on international environ
