narrative does not appear even once). Some of these modified SIR models involve
complex patterns of outcomes, and sometimes cycles. Geographic models of spread
are increasingly complicated by worldwide social media connections (Bailey et al.
2016).
Some SIR models (surveyed in Lamberson 2016) dispense with replacing the
idea of random mixing and choose instead a network structure. There may be strategic
decisions whether or not to allow oneself to be infected, and the fraction of
the population infected may enter into the decision (Jackson and Yariv 2005). There
are variations of models that describe individuals as adopting a practice not merely
through random infection but through rational calculations of the information
transmitted through their encounters with others (Banerjee 1992; Bikhchandani,
Hirshleifer, and Welch 1992).
Currently, there is not any one single model for social epidemics; instead, there
is a tool-bag of models for understanding epidemics depending on their circumstances.
But we can still refer to the original Kermack-McKendrick SIR model as
a metaphor for the class of dynamic models that rely on contagion and recovery.
These other models typically still take analogues of c and r as fundamental parameters,
still have the property that a slight tweak of c upward or r downward may set
in motion a chain of events that sets off an epidemic with a lag, so that on the date
the epidemic is first publicly noticed, the causes are now in fairly distant history and
hard to discern.
Even though direct face-to-face communication of ideas is less important in
modern times, because of the communications media, the Kermack-McKendrick
model still remains an important model for economics. The core model may apply
no matter what way people may connect with each other. There is a concern that
modern communications media (the press, the Internet, etc.) make the SIR model
less accurate in describing social epidemics. But the change may instead be roughly
within the framework of the model, with higher contagion rates for narratives due to
the social media automatically directing narratives to people with likely interest in
them, regardless of their geography. Moreover, marketing literature finds that direct
word-of-mouth communications still beat other forms in persuasiveness (Herr,
Kardes, and Kim 1991), and the marketing profession has responded by promoting
word-of-mouth seeding strategies and television ads that feature actors portraying
people with whom the common person can identify and simulating direct interpersonal
word of mouth. In considering the Internet and social media and the SIR
model, Zhao et al. (2013) argue for a modified SIR model where analogues to the
parameters c and r are both increased by the new media.
Bauckhage (2011) showed evidence that the SIRS variant of the KermackMcKendrick
compartmental model fits time series data reasonably well on Internet
memes from Google Insights (now Google Trends.) He looked at silly recent
Internet viruses like the "O RLY?" (Oh, really?) meme that displayed nothing more
than a picture of a cute owl with what would appear to be a puzzled facial expression.
Because the memes are largely nonsensical, we might expect them to follow a
course independent of other ideas and thus to fit the SIRS model well, as he found.
Roughly the same hump-shaped pattern of infectives was found again and again.
Michel et al. (201 1) showed evidence that mentions of famous people in books
tends to follow a hump-shaped pattern through time, a slow epidemic, so