in 1935, Cole and Ohanian argue that the Roosevelt administration was able to keep
the substance of the codes going anyway.
Eichengreen (1996) and Eichengreen and Temin (2000) have argued that the per-
sistence of the Great Depression has something to do with an unthinking national
commitment to the gold standard, as if it were some kind of God-given virtue, despite
changes in labor markets that made wages more downwardly rigid. They show that
countries which abandoned the gold standard earlier showed better recoveries.
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, in their Monetary History of the United
States, blamed the Great Depression on the Federal Reserve, saying that it was
explained by variations in the money supply. It was this book that coined the term
"quasi-controlled experiment," anticipating the large number of papers we now have
under the rubric of "natural experiment," but the authors didn't have any such claims
at this point. Peter Temin put Friedman and Schwartz in a better perspective. The
declines in the money supply were mostly endogenous, triggered in part by a series
of bank runs, caused by the same feedback that created the Great Depression, and
Friedman and Schwartz were really saying nothing more than that the Fed would
have done better if they had offset these declines. Temin also observed that Friedman
and Schwartz indicated no substantial correspondence between the bank runs and
measures of economic activity.
Once again, I argue that most likely a multiplicity of factors, whose confluence
produced such severity, caused people to cut back substantially on their expendi-
tures, and these factors in turn often have the form of epidemics of narratives.
The first new narrative of the Great Depression was that of the stock market drop
on October 28, 1929. This narrative was especially powerful, in its suddenness and
severity, focusing public attention on a crash as never before in America. These were
record one-day drops. But, beyond the record size, it is hard to say what made this
crash narrative such a success. There was something timed very well about this story
that caused an immediate and lasting public reaction.
The narrative of the crash of 1929 was so strong that it persists today (see
Figure 6), though more in books than in newspapers. The epidemic actually seems
to have begun weakly in 1926, before the actual crash of 1929. In newspapers, there
have been two fast epidemics, each peaking within a year, implying very strong
short-run contagion. The first assumed massive proportions in 1929 with the record
12.8 percent one-day drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on October 28,
1929. The second started on October 19, 1987, when the Dow had a 22.6 per-
cent drop, almost doubling the October 28, 1929 drop, though falling short of the
two-day drop in 1929. It may seem odd that no other stock price movement merited
being called a crash since 1929. Newspapers are very focused on records, presum-
ably because they know their readers are, and 1987 was the only record one-day
drop after 1929. Folklore suggests that the stock market epidemic had extremely
high contagion in 1929.
We know there was high contagion in 1987. In my own mail questionnaire survey
in the days following October 19, 1987, 1 asked when the respondent learned of the
1987 crash. Ninety-seven percent of respondents said they learned of it that day, and
most of them by midday, meaning neither from morning news or evening news, but
presumably largely from word of mouth (Shiller 1989). The 1987 epidemic looks
far stronger than the 1929 one, but it certainly draws its strength from mem