updating method, that is substantially different from those currently in use, and that preserves a
better continuity with previous estimates.

Section IV, which is again somewhat more technical, is an enquiry into the international price
indexes themselves, with a focus on the factors that affect global inequality. It starts from the
question of how to price comparable goods in different countries and whether the ever more
precise specification of goods by the ICP has had the effect of making poor countries poorer
relative to rich countries, widening our estimates of international inequality, and causing the
global poverty line to increase in dollar terms at a rate that is markedly slower than the rate of
inflation in the United States. More generally, 1 discuss the special difficulties of making com
parisons between countries whose relative prices and patterns of consumption are very different,
for example between Japan and Kenya, or Britain and Cameroon. Such comparisons are required
if we are to make multilateral price index numbers for the world as a whole, and I use data from
the 2005 ICP to investigate their credibility. My analysis shows that these comparisons rest on
weak theoretical foundations and are fragile in practice.

Section V returns to the main argument and looks briefly at a monitoring system based on
asking people about how their lives are going; I use data from the Gallup World Poll which
collects an annual sample of all the people of the world. Section VI concludes, and speculates
on the global system of income and poverty statistics as a whole. I argue that we should be
less ambitious and more skeptical in using the international data, particularly when comparing
poor and rich countries. I also make recommendations for improvements in the way the poverty
counts are calculated, for example by bringing closer together the rhetoric and the reality of the
dollar a day poverty line. I also argue that while changes in the poverty line affect the levels of
global poverty more than they affect its rate of change, the levels are themselves important for  the international debate.
I. Global Poverty and Global Inequality

Many countries have their own national poverty lines and poverty headcounts. One candidate
measure for an international count would use those national numbers and add them up over all
countries. The 2008 annual poverty line in the United States was $21,834 for a family of two
adults and two children, or $14.96 per person per day; 13.2 percent of Americans live below
this line. India in 2004-05 had two poverty lines, one for rural households of 11.71 rupees per
person per day, and one for urban households of 17.71 rupees; at the 2005 PPP exchange rates,
these lines are $0.80 and $1.21 per person per day (about a third of that at market exchange rates),
and 27.5 percent of the Indian population lives below them. If we take the view that poverty is
relative to prevailing living standards in the society in which people live, these headcount ratios
might be taken to be comparable. Yet the global poverty counts aim to measure absolute poverty
and to count those who are destitute by a common global standard which might be supposed to
include all of the locally poor Indians, and none of the locally poor Americans. By this view,
we might take one or the other Indian lines and use PPP exchange rates to convert it to other
currencies, and then sum the total number of people in the world who live on less than the local
purchasing power equivalent of the Indian line. The pioneering paper by Ahluwalia, Carter, and
Chenery (1979) used a global line based on the Indian poverty line, but since World Bank (1990)
the global line has been an average of the international dollar value of local lines of a number of
poor countries. Exactly which average is a matter of some importance, as is whether the average
is better than the original Indian only line, and I shall return to both issues.
Table 1 presents the key numbers. The first three columns, taken from the World Bank's
(2008b) poverty supplement to the World Development Indicators, show the latest estimates for
1981 (which is as far back as these estimates go). 1993, and 2005. These are based on the latest