in these stories: in 1936, speaking of the magnates of organized money, he said "I
welcome their hatred." (Higgs 1997).

The Communist conspiracy narrative, from the late 1930s, included anecdotes
about increasingly leftist labor laws stymieing business. Stories circulated of outside-
agitator unions disrupting peaceful companies whose employees were happy

with their jobs; of strangers picketing and coordinated refusals of other unions to
handle the company's products; of the existing employees forming their own union
to try to stave off the attack, and the radical National Labor Relations Board throwing
it out as a "company union."29

One of the stories that was circulating in the United States during the Great
Depression was that of Lázaro Cardenas, the president of Mexico (1934-1940). Just
as in the United States, the Depression amplified calls for socialist or Communist
solutions in Mexico, which put fear in the hearts of businesspeople. Cardenas expropriated
land from the commercial haciendas, and in 1938 nationalized the Mexican

oil industry and railroads. These actions were seen as a model for what might happen
in other countries, and indeed nationalizations in other countries did follow
Cárdenas' example, though not in the United States.

A huge rise in policy uncertainty in both the United States and the United

Kingdom was revealed by the Economic Policy Uncertainty Index of Scott R. Baker,
Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2016), which is based on counts of words in
online news media.

X. Narratives Leading Up to the Great Recession, 2007-2009

The 2007-2009 world financial crisis has been called the Great Recession as a
reference to the Great Depression of the 1930s. Certainly, the narrative of the Great
Depression was suddenly thrust into the national attention as never before, not since
the 1930s (see Figure 7).

The figure suggests far more attention was paid in 2009 to the Great Depression
than during the Great Depression itself, though one must be careful to understand
that people hadn't really named it the Great Depression yet as it happened. They
certainly had Depression-linked narratives, associated with words unusual to that
period, such as breadline, a word that Google Ngrams shows grew rapidly in use in
books from 1929 to 1934, and decayed fairly steadily ever since.

The interest in the Great Depression in 2009 is confirmed in Google Trends

search counts as well, though not as dramatically as in Figure 7. This does not mean
that people were suddenly more interested in Franklin Roosevelt or the New Deal.
Counts show virtually no increase in interest in these details of history. It was more
just a quick and easy way to communicate narrative: we have passed, by 2007, a
euphoric speculative immoral period like the Roaring Twenties, the stock market
and banks are collapsing in 2008 as around 1929, and now the economy might really
collapse again like that; we might even be unemployed and on the street crowding
around failed banks, yes really! End of basic nar
