A second general point is that we should not expect some new grand behavioral
theory to emerge to replace the neoclassical paradigm. We already have a grand
theory and it does a really good job of characterizing how optimal choices and
equilibrium concepts work. Behavioral theories will be more like engineering, a
set of practical enhancements that lead to better predictions about behavior. So far,
most of these behavioral enhancements focus on two broad topics: preferences and
beliefs.
A. Behavioral Preferences
Prospect theory is a good illustration of a model based on assumptions about pref-
erences that differ from the ones used to derive expected utility theory. Specifically,
most of prospect theory's predictive power comes from three crucial assumptions
about preferences. First, utility is derived from changes in wealth relative to some
reference point, rather than levels of wealth, as is usually assumed in theories
based on expected utility.9 Second, the "value function" which translates perceived
changes in wealth into utility, has a kink at the origin, with losses weighed more
heavily than gains - i.e., "loss aversion." Third, decision weights are a function of
probabilities n(p) where II(p) 7^ p. These aspects of the theory were inferred from
studying the choices subjects made when asked to choose between gambles.
Two other research streams have been based on models of preferences. The first
topic is intertemporal choice. As revealed by the quotations from Smith, Pigou, and
Fisher mentioned earlier in this essay, economists have long worried that people
display what we now call "present biased" preferences, meaning that the discount
rate between "now" and "later" is much higher than between "later" and "even
later." Such preferences can lead to time-inconsistent behavior since we expect to be
patient in choosing between a smaller reward in a year and a larger reward in a year
plus a week, but when the year passes and the smaller reward is available "now," we
submit to temptation. If people realize they have such preferences, they may choose
to commit themselves now to choosing the larger delayed reward, a strategy they
will later regret (at least for a week or so).
Two kinds of models have been proposed to deal with these aberrant preferences.
One is based on a two-self (or "two-system") approach that is meant to capture
the inherent conflict that defines self-control problems. In the version of this type
of model that Hersh Shefrin and I favor (Thaler and Shefrin 1981) individuals are
assumed to have a long-sighted "planner" and myopic "doer" that interact in a
model similar to agency models of organizations. Schelling (1984) and Fudenberg
and Levine (2006) also proposed two-self models to characterize this behavior.
Although these two-self models provide more psychological texture, they have
not been as popular among economic theorists as the simpler and more tractable
"beta-delta" model originally proposed by Strotz ( 1955) and then refined by Laibs