In sum, while there is room for disagreement about the effects of QE on
longer-term yields, most evidence supports the view that they were both economi-
cally significant and persistent. In particular, the research rejects the notion that QE
is only effective during periods of financial disruption. Instead, once market partic-
ipants’ expectations are accounted for, the impact of new purchase programs seems
to have been more or less constant over time, independent of market functioning, the
level of rates, or the size of the central bank balance sheet.
B. Forward Guidance
The second new tool used by almost all major central banks in recent years,
other than asset purchases, is forward guidance. Forward guidance, or “open mouth
operations” (Guthrie and Wright 2000), is communication about how monetary pol-
icymakers expect the economy and policy to evolve. Forward guidance takes many
forms (such as the specification of policy targets, economic and policy projections)
and occurs in many venues (speeches and testimonies, monetary policy reports).
The Fed took several steps to enhance its communications during the  post-crisis
period, including introducing press conferences by the chair, setting a formal infla-
tion target, and releasing more detailed economic projections by FOMC partici-
pants, including policy rate projections. I focus here though on formal guidance by
the policy committee about the future paths of key policy instruments, especially
policy rates and asset purchases.
Forward guidance, at least in a broad sense, was not new to the  post-crisis period.
The Fed used variants of forward guidance in the Greenspan era, for example, in the
promises of the FOMC in  2003–2004 to keep rates low “for a considerable period” or
to remove accommodation “at a pace that is likely to be measured.” Ample evidence
suggests that these and other  pre-crisis communications by the FOMC affected mar -
ket expectations of policy rates and thus asset prices and yields generally. For exam-
ple, Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005), using a  high-frequency event study,
showed that the effects of monetary policy announcements on asset prices can be
decomposed into two factors: one associated with unexpected changes in the current
setting of the federal funds rate and the other with news about the expected future
path of the funds rate, which the authors associated with the (implicit or explicit)
forward guidance in the policy statement. Both factors are important, with the
forward guidance factor being particularly influential in determining  longer-term
yields. Other central banks had also used communication as a policy tool before the
crisis, an early example being the Bank of Japan, whose  zero-interest-rate policy
included a promise not to raise the policy rate from zero until certain conditions had
been met.
Campbell et al. (2012) introduced the useful distinction between Delphic and
Odyssean forward guidance. Delphic guidance (after the oracles at the Temple of
Apollo at Delphi) is intended only to be informative, to help the public and market
participants understand policymakers’ economic outlook and policy plans. In con-
trast, Odyssean guidance goes beyond simple economic or policy forecasts by incor -
porating a promise or commitment by policymakers to conduct policy in a specified,
possibly  state-contingent way in the future (as when Odysseus bound himself to the
mast to avoid the temptations of the Sirens).