Sometimes, establishing a clearinghouse to replace an unraveled decentralized
market involves designing the way that offers in the larger decentralized market and
in the centralized marketplace will interact.58 This was an issue in the ( re)establishment
of a centralized clearinghouse for gastroenterology fellows, to replace a market that had unraveled steadily since a previous clearinghouse had been aban-doned (Niederle and Roth 2003b) . One purpose of the match was to move hiring
of fellows later in the careers of internal medicine residents, who would become gastroenterology fellows only after completing their residency. But there was a concern that those fellowship programs that delayed making offers until the later time at which the clearinghouse would operate would be “scooped” by their com-petitors who might keep making early offers. That is, the clearinghouse was to be a marketplace in a larger market, in which early hiring might still continue, because the gastroenterology organizations did not have any ability to restrain fel-lowship directors from continuing to make early offers. What the professional soci-eties could do, however, was empower students who had accepted an early offer to change their minds and later participate in the centralized marketplace. This was sufficient to get the clearinghouse off to a successful start ( Niederle, Proctor, and
Roth 2006, 2008) .

59

The problems that cause medical markets to organize centralized clearinghouses
aren’t a thing of the past. Several medical subspecialties have recently organized clearinghouses to combat unraveling.
60 But for many medical labor markets, centralized

clearinghouses are a mature technology, and strategies for navigating the market have adapted.
In particular, when markets are unraveled, there isn’t a lot of interviewing, because
attractive applicants get early exploding offers as programs try to fill their positions before their competitors, and programs don’t need to conduct further interviews once their positions are filled. But when a centralized clearinghouse allows partici-pants to consider many alternatives, both employers and applicants are interested in gathering and transmitting information in interviews, to determine their preferences, and to impress their counterparties with how desirable they are. Consequently, res-idency and fellowship programs conduct many interviews. Unlike the market for new economists, there is no central national meeting at which a large propor