These parts of the grand gender convergence occupy various metaphorical chapters
in the history of gender roles in the economy and society. But what must be in
the "last" chapter for there to be real equalityThe

answer may come as a surprise. The solution does not (necessarily) have to

involve government intervention. It does not have to improve women's bargaining
skills and desire to compete. And it does not necessarily have to make men

more responsible in the home (although that wouldn't hurt). But it must involve
alterations in the labor market, in particular changing how jobs are structured and
remunerated to enhance temporal flexibility. The gender gap in pay would be considerably
reduced and might even vanish if firms did not have an incentive to disproportionately
reward individuals who worked long hours and who worked particular

hours. Such change has already occurred in various sectors, but not in enough.
Before I discuss what is needed to close the gender gap and what must be in the
last chapter, I should first discuss what is contained in the preceding figurative chapters.
That will set the stage for the detective work necessary to uncover what the last
chapter must contain.

The preceding metaphorical chapters unfolded across at least the last century.
Narrowing occurred in a host of economic areas. Changes in labor force participation
and the reasons for the changes were discussed in my Ely Lecture (Goldin

2006). A grand convergence occurred in labor force participation for adult women
from the early twentieth century to more recently. But a plateau in participation
has emerged for US women in most age groups, even for college graduate women,
since around the 1990s. The plateau may be related to the relative earnings issues
that I will soon discuss. If certain women are disadvantaged in the labor market their
participation will be stymied.2

Lifetime job experience rose along with labor force participation. Years of education
for women increased more than it did for men and it changed in content

for secondary and college education toward more investment-oriented and fewer
consumption-oriented courses and concentrations. Professional and graduate program
enrollment increased for women so that about half of all law and medical

enrollments today are women, and women lead men in fields such as the biological
sciences, pharmacy, optometry, and veterinary medicine.

Women, particularly college graduates, increased their desire to attain "career
and family."3 Hours of work for women increased in the market and decreased in
the home relative to those of men. Female earnings rose relative to males in an era
that saw women "swimming against the tide" of generally rising income inequality.4
Thus the various metaphorical chapters that precede the "last" chapter explored here
are those of a grand gender convergence.

Convergence in some economic outcomes has also occurred within various groups
of women. Until the 1970s most non-employed adult women had not been in the
workforce since they were first married or since having their first
