screen them more reliably if the initial contacts were through email.94 So there also
seem to be some harm reduction benefits of moving marketplaces for prostitution
off the street.
Another market that is repugnant and legally limited or banned in many venues,
but is fully legal in others, is surrogacy, i.e., the market for someone to bear a child for someone else. The most usual form is gestational surrogacy, in which a woman agrees to be impregnated with a fertilized egg, and to bring the child to term. In this kind of surrogacy, the pregnant surrogate mother is not genetically related to the child. The surrogate parents, i.e., the parents who intend to assume parental rights and raise the child, may have contributed both sperm and egg, or just the egg, or just sperm, or have obtained the fertilized egg with the help of both a sperm and egg donor. Male couples are often clients in surrogate pregnancies, since they have no womb between them. However single parents and heterosexual couples can also be clients for a variety of medical and other reasons.
95
In some jurisdictions (including much of Western Europe), surrogacy is illegal,
and there are legal obstacles that may make it difficult for parents to repatriate a surrogate child born elsewhere. An extreme example comes from Italy, where the courts removed a surrogate child from the parents’ custody and placed it with a social service agency for subsequent adoption. (In this case the surrogate parents were not genetically related to the child.) The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled that Italy was within its rights “to reaffirm the State’s exclusive com-petence to recognize a legal parent-child relationship” (ECHR 2017). But the urge to have children is strong, and adoption is not a perfect substitute, so families are also willing to take extreme measures. Sweden, where surrogacy is illegal, has been a pioneer in womb transplantation, for example.
In other places, for example England and Canada and some American states,
surrogacy is legal but “commercial surrogacy” is not: i.e., it is illegal to pay the sur -
rogate mother (although some expenses may be reimbursed). This severely limits the availability of surrogates in these places, mostly to family members, so that for example a woman’s mother may become her surrogate, and give birth to her own (the surrogate’s) grandchild. Other limitations on surrogacy limit its reliable use in family planning: in England and Canada the birth mother (i.e., the surrogate) is the legally presumed mother of the child, and is not allowed to give up her maternal