regions, allowing transfers may allow a more efficient treaty (see Barrett 2003,
ch. 13). However, allowing transfers also increases the dimensionality of the strat-
egy space and may increase the potential for coalition instability.
Before discussing the strategic issues, a practical exception must be made for
poor countries. We can hardly expect low-income countries struggling to provide
clean water or engaged in civil conflict to make the same commitment as rich coun-
tries. So there might be a threshold for participation in terms of per capita income.
But once countries graduate into the middle-income group, they would assume the
obligations of club membership.
What happens if surplus-sharing is included as part of country strategies? If there
are no sharing constraints, then coalition instability is inevitable in what might be
called the stab-in-the-back syndrome. This can be seen in the case of three regions.
Suppose that a cooperative agreement of the three regions has a surplus of 300 units,
and agreements require a majority of countries. A first agreement might divide the
surplus equally among the three regions as proposal A = (100, 100, 100). However,
a coalition of the first two countries could propose another allocation as proposal
B = ( 1 10, 1 10, 80), which would lead the first two countries to defect from proposal
A to B. A little reflection will show that there is no stable coalition if the surplus can
be divided arbitrarily. (For examples of how different sharing and voting rules lead
to instability, see Meyerson 1991, ch. 9.)
One difficulty with the use of differentiated emissions targets in the Kyoto Protocol
was its stab-in-the-back instability. The initial allocation of permits across countries
is a zero-sum distribution. It can generate the same instability as the example of
the negotiation over the division of the surplus. One of the attractive features of a
regime that focuses on carbon prices is that it can operate as a single-dimensional
choice and thereby avoid stab-in-the-back instability. 1 A study of climate regimes
by Weikard, Finus, and Altamirano-Cabrera (2006) confirms the potential for insta-
bility in climate agreements with transfers (see the online Appendix).
C. Introducing Sanctions on Nonparticipants
Both theory and history suggest that some form of sanctions on nonparticipants is
required to induce countries to participate in agreements with high levels of abate-
ment. It will be useful to define "sanctions" or "penalties" carefully. In their land-
mark study of sanctions, Hufbauer, Schott, and Elliot (1990) define sanctions as
governmental withdrawal, or threat of withdrawal, of customary trade or financial
relationships. A key aspect of the sanctions analyzed here is that they benefit senders
and harm receivers. This pattern contrasts with most cases analyzed by Hufbauer,
Schott, and Elliot, whose studies show that sanctions usually impose costs on send-
ers as well as receivers and thereby raise issues of incentive-compatibility.
The major potential instrument is sanctions on international trade. Whether and
how to use international trade in connection with a climate treaty involves many
issues - economic, environmental, legal, and diplomatic. I will e