wages (see Di Addario et al. forthcoming for a simple exposition focusing on starting
wages for each job).

B. Differentiated Demand Models

Chamberlain (1933) considered a model in which firms produce a differentiated
set of products and set prices ignoring strategic interactions with other producers.
This model translates directly to the supply side,5 though to the best of my knowledge
Bhaskar and To (1999) were the first to try to formalize the idea of monopsonistic
competition. Chamberlain’s simple graphical analysis was reproduced

in many undergraduate textbooks, but (as noted above) had a limited impact on
subsequent research until Spence (1976) and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) wrote down
CES-style models of representative agent preferences that rationalized his framework.
Models based on these preferences (and generalizations with a nested CES

structure) have proven amenable to a multitude of applications in different fields.
Recently, Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2021) have adapted the approach to the
study of wage setting.

An alternative approach to modeling demand for differentiated products is the
multinomial logit (MNL) model proposed by McFadden (1974, 1978). The MNL

and its generalizations specify  individual-level preferences that lead to convenient
expressions for the share of consumers that purchase each product (Berry 1994),
and are widely used in industrial organization (IO) and labor economics. Card
et al. (2018) proposed the use of MNL style preferences to model the dispersion in
tastes for different workplaces. If employers ignore strategic interactions in wage
setting, their setup leads to very simple expressions for the supply of labor to individual
firms which can be used to rationalize the firm effects in a model like that of
Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999). Azar, Berry, and Marinescu (2019) adapt
this approach (with nested MNL preferences) to model the supply of applicants
to different job openings. Likewise, Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setlzer (2022) use a
nested MNL specification to model the supply of workers to individual firms.
While the “representative agent CES” approach and the “individual level MNL”
approach might appear to be very different ways of modeling consumer demand
(or labor supply), Anderson, de Palma, and Thisse (1978) and Verboven (1996)
showed that at the market level they are isomorphic (subject to functional form
choices about the terms in the CES function and the indirect utility function in the
MNL).6 This isomorphism is extremely convenient and in principal allows analysts
to proceed with either approach, and build on advances that have been made in the
two li
