poorer relative to the rich world. With no change in the global poverty line, or with a more
appropriate updating method, there would have been no sharp discontinuity in the counts. It is
possible to argue that the upward revision in levels is unimportant, provided that the downward
trend in poverty remains the same, but I do not believe that this is the case. Because there are
nearly 200 million Indians who live on between $1.00 and $1.25 a day, the increase in the line
adds many more Indians to the counts than it adds Africans. Although the prevalence of pov
erty remains higher in sub-Saharan Africa, the relative "Indianization" of poverty (or rather
"re-Indianization" of poverty, see Table 1) is likely to change the terms of the aid debate. Indeed,
the proportional rate of poverty decline in India is lower with the higher baseline, so India is
no longer on target to meet the first Millennium Development Goal (Himanshu 2008, Chen
and Ravallion, forthcoming). More generally, the number of poor people in the world is widely
quoted in public debate, so that arbitrary?and poorly understood?changes undermine any
usefulness that these numbers might otherwise have had.

How should the global poverty line be set in the future? There are two quite different
approaches, depending on whether we take our standard from the poor world, as in the current
count, or from the rich world, which is my own preference. In the former, the global line is linked
to national lines of poor countries, but given its claims to be an absolute standard, it should not
move upwards as countries become richer. One simple possibility would be to use the current
Indian line in rupees, or at least a population-weighted average of its rural and urban lines as
was done in the first global counts by Ahluwalia, Carter and Chenery (1979). If India revises
its poverty line upwards as it gets richer, as has recently been proposed on different grounds by
a Government of India Expert Group (2009), the world line should continue to be the original
Indian line, and the world count would simply be the number of people in the world living below
the poverty line set in India when a large fraction of its population was destitute. If the Indo
centric approach is not acceptable, the world poverty line could remain, as now, an average of
poverty lines from poor countries, although, once again, those poverty lines need not and should
not be changed over time; this is what was done until the current revision. There will still be
changes in the global line as successive ICP revisions change the relative PPPs of poor countries,
something that cannot be avoided.

The alternative procedure would be to make the global poverty line in fact what it is widely
perceived to be, one international dollar per person a day. Whatever its origins, it would in future
be updated by the US CPI only, so the global line would be a dollar in 2005 prices. If this rule
had been in place, the 2005 revision, by making developing countries poorer relative to the
United States, would indeed have made the "developing world" appear to be poorer, and would
have avoided much confusion about what had actually happened, not least the confusion within
the World Bank itself. Since the dollar a day counts are used almost entirely by rich world NGOs
and international organizations, denominating the poverty line in dollars (or perhaps Euros)  would better match the measure to its intended audience.