That is not the end of the story, however, because the adaptive model's endogenous stochastic
dynamics occasionally make v vary enough for the government to discover a version of the
natural rate hypothesis that is too strong because it mistakenly asserts that there is almost no
trade-off whatsoever between 77 and U The adaptive system is destined to experience recurrent
episodes in which "a most likely unlikely" sequence of h>'s lowers the unconditional correlation
between U and 77, which alters 0, in ways that induce the government to push vt below its
self-confirming value.30 That generates data that further weaken the unconditional correlation
between inflation and unemployment and moves 6t in a direction that drives v even lower. The
ultimate destination of this "escape" from a self-confirming equilibrium is that the government
estimates that 6X is close to 0, prompting it to set vt close to the optimal value 0. These escapes are
more likely when the government's estimator (16) discounts past data more heavily, for example,
by implementing a so-called constant gain algorithm. An escape is temporary because the mean
dynamics that drive the system toward the SCE vector 0o are bound to reassert themselves and
push inflation back toward the suboptimal SCE value of h(0o). If this is a good parable for the
Volcker-Greenspan stabilization, we should be worried.

Details.?Simulations of Sims (1988) generated sample paths that seemed promising for
explaining a Volcker-like stabilization prompted by the government's ability to learn a good
enough version of the natural rate hypothesis. However, formal econometric attempts to implement
the model by Chung (1990) and Sargent (1999) failed to fit the US data well, mainly because
the government's adaptive algorithm caught on to the adverse shifts in the Phillips curve quickly
in the early 1970s. Sargent, Williams, and Zha (2006b) replaced the constant gain algorithm
used in the earlier models with a Bayesian updating procedure implied by a drifting coefficients
model with covariance matrix V for the innovations in the drifts to the coefficients. By
estimating V along with the parameters of nature's model by maximum likelihood, they reverse
engineered a drifting set of government beliefs that, when put into the Phelps problem each
period, produce a sequence of first-period Phelps policy recommendations that do a good job of
matching the actual inflation data. The estimated V implies that the intercept in the Fed's model
is quite volatile and thus makes contact with Arthur Burns's Fed, which according to Robert
Hetzel (1998), attributed much of the inflation of the 1970s to special factors akin to dummy
variables that capture intercept drift in regressions. More generally, the large estimated V conveys
the image of a government that expects coefficients to drift so much that it discounts past
data heavily. The statistical model's conjuring up a Fed that overfits its models to recent data is
food for thought for Fed watchers. The synthesized government beliefs succeed in rationalizing
inflation ex post as a response to these government beliefs, and the beliefs themselves do a good
job of forecasting inflation, thus capturing what seems to have been a remarkably good record of
inflation forecasting by the Fed (see Bernanke 2007).31

The Best of All Possible Worlds??In the preceding story, government policy actions recurrently
take values that are optimal under the correct model, but only temporarily because the
mean dynamics push the government's beliefs back to the SCE. Thus, this story, at best, only
temporarily supports the optimism expressed by Sims (1988) that the government's misspecified