Logarithm of mean household expenditure

Figure 2. The Construction of the Global Poverty Line

I illustrate the argument using Figure 2 and by focusing on two of the marked countries, India
(population in 2005 1.1 billion) and tiny Guinea-Bissau (population in 2005 1.6 million). The
line PP shows the $38 a month global line ($1.25 a day). India's poverty line is a good deal lower
than the global line and Guinea-Bissau's a good deal higher. Note that, although there are round
to round revisions in the PPPs used to establish the international value of these local lines, the
relative position of the lines depends on the domestic procedure that is used to set the national
lines in local currency. Over time, as country incomes change, either in reality or through mea
surement error, some countries will move across the cutoff line AA. Consider first India, which
has a low poverty line relative to its living standards, and suppose that India has recently moved
across the line from left to right. At the point where it is just on the line, there will be an upward
discontinuity in the global poverty line as India drops out of the average, and a corresponding
upward discontinuity in the global poverty count, much?but not all?of it from India. Not only
is there a discontinuity, but in this particular example, the change is of the wrong sign, with a
small increase in Indian incomes causing a large increase in Indian and other countries' poverty
counts. In effect, India and the world have become poorer because India has become richer! Turn
now to Guinea-Bissau, and suppose that it becomes richer?through an increase in the world
price of cashews, or only apparently so through measurement error?so that it moves across the
line AA from left to right. Because Guinea-Bissau has a high poverty line, the global poverty
line will decrease, as will global poverty, and this effect turns out to be rather more than 20 times
the population of Guinea-Bissau. These problems would not occur if the relationship in Figure
1 were exact, rather than a scatter. With a scatter, the updating procedure violates monotonicity,
that if poverty falls in any country included in the counts, and increases nowhere else, global
poverty should fall. The current procedure does not satisfy that basic requirement. Nor does it
satisfy the property that global poverty should fall by no more than the fall in poverty in indi  vidual countries.
An alternative procedure for deriving the global line is to average the available national lines
for all of the countries in the counts. This runs the risk of including poverty lines that are too high