approximation of actual behavior for bright children and sober adults. Chess, on the
other hand, is quite a different matter. Most of us play chess terribly and would have
no chance of beating a free program on our smartphones, much less a grandmaster.
So, it makes no sense to assume that the representative agent plays chess as well as
tic-tac-toe. But that is essentially what we assume in economics.

When we assume that agents maximize utility (or profits) we do not condition
that assumption on task difficulty. We assume that people are equally good at deciding
how many eggs to buy for breakfast and solving for the right amount to save for
retirement. That assumption is, on the face of it, preposterous. So why has it stuckThere
has been a litany of explainawaytions.

A. Aí If

Grumblings within the profession about the so-called "marginalist revolution"
were present in the 1940s, and this journal published several articles debating the
realism of the theory that firms set output and hire workers by calculating the point at
which marginal cost equals marginal revenue. One of the participants in this debate
was Richard Lester of Princeton who had the temerity to ask the owners of business
firms how they actually made such decisions. Whatever firms were doing did not
seem to be captured by the term "equating at the margin," and Lester (1946, p. 81)
ended his paper this way: "This paper raises grave doubts as to the validity of conventional
marginal theory and the assumptions on which it rests." Machlup (1946)

took up the defense of the traditional theory and argued that even if firm owners did
not know how to calculate marginal costs and revenues, they would make decisions
that would closely approximate such choices using their intuitions.

Machlup's defense was refined and polished by Friedman (1953, p. 21) in his
famous essay "The Methodology of Positive Economics." Friedman brushed aside
questions about the realism of assumptions and argued that instead theories should
be judged based on their ability to predict behavior. He proposed what is now a
well-known analogy about an expert billiard player: "excellent predictions would
be yielded by the hypothesis that the billiard player made his shots as if he knew
the complicated mathematical formulas that would give the optimum directions of
travel, could estimate by eye the angles, etc., describing the location of the balls,
could make lightening calculations from the formulas, and could then make the balls
travel in the direction indicated by the formulas. Our confidence in this hypothesis is
not based on the belief that billiard players, even expert ones, can or do go through
the process described; it derives rather from the belief that, unless in some way or
other they were capable of reaching essentially the same result, they would not in
fact be expert billiard players."

Friedman had a well-deserved reputation as a brilliant communicator and

debater, and those skills are on full display in this passage. Using the mere
two-word phrase "as if," Friedman essentially ended the debate about the realism
of assumptions in economics. But given proper scrutiny, we can see that this passage
is simply a verbal sleight of hand. First of all, it is no accident that Friedman
chooses to discuss an expert billiard player. The behavior of an expert in many
activities may indeed be well captured by a model that assumes optimal behavior.
But what about non-experts? Isn't economic theory supposed to be a theory
