Slovenia, South Africa, and Zambia. As suggested by Diewert (2008), these detailed ring prices
were used in a modified version of the CPD regression (1)

(3) \npf - In/?/7" = cy? + 7/ +

where p-'f is the ring price for item j in basic head / in country c in region r, p[r is the previ
ously established regional parity for basic head /, from (3), and the right-hand side variables are
regional and item dummies. Intuitively, each item price in the ring, p-- \ the price of shrimp (j) in
the fish basic heading (z) in ring country c in region r, is converted to the region numeraire cur
rency (e.g., Hong Kong dollars for Asia/Pacific) using the previously established within-region
parity for fish, pc'r from (2). The regression (3) then picks out the regional log price level for
fish, a'h e.g., in Hong-Kong dollars per global numeraire, which is the numeraire of the OECD
Eurostat region, the US dollar. We then have a set of all-region parities for each basic heading,
exp(a/"), which are unity for the numeraire region (OECD-Eurostat). These "prices," together
with the regional aggregates of expenditures on each basic head expressed in regional numeraire
currency, are used in a global multilateral aggregation to give regional PPPs, one index for each
region, that allow the within-region PPPs to be scaled up to global PPPs.

Four specific aspects of this ICP construction are of concern here. First, the absence of weights
within basic headings, including the lack of representativity weights, may result in basic head
ings being priced using high-priced unrepresentative goods that are rarely consumed in some
countries. This is a particular concern for the ring, where identical goods are being matched
across very different countries. Second, when country PPPs are constructed from the prices of
basic headings, the ICP uses expenditure weights from the national accounts. These weights are
appropriate for national income accounting purposes but do not reflect the consumption patterns
of people who are poor by global standards. Third, the joining of the regions using the ring
information is based on region-wide "super" PPPs in which, for example, there is a price level
for Africa or Asia/Pacific relative to the OECD. Measurement errors, or conceptual problems in
these indexes?I think of these as "tectonic" price indexes?play an important role in determin
ing global inequality. Fourth is an issue to which I shall return only briefly, which is an urban
bias in price collection in some countries, particularly large countries such as China.
The second issue, reweighting for poverty, has been investigated by Deaton and Dupriez
(2009) who compute a new set of PPPs for the countries in the poverty counts, using the price
data from the 2005 ICP but reweighting by the expenditure patterns of people near the global
poverty line in each country. Their main result is that the poverty-weighted PPPs, or P4s, are very
close to the usual PPPs, or P3s. Indeed, the main difference between the indexes comes not from
the reweighting, but because the P4s use household survey data?the only source of information
on the expenditure patterns of the poor?rather than NAS data, and because there are incon
sistencies between the two sources. The insensitivity to reweighting may seem surprising given
that patterns of consumption for the global poor are very different from the plutocratic patterns
of consumption in the national accounts. But that by itself is not enough to generate a difference
in the price index or the PPP. Between any pair of countries, the substitution of poverty-line for
NAS budget shares will only change the price index between them if the change in budget shares
induced by movement down the income distribution is systematically correlated across goods
with the price relatives in the two countries. This would happen if we were calculating a price
index for a pair of countries, one rich, with low food share and low relative prices of food, and
a poor country, with high food share and high relative prices for food (much of food is traded),
where the move from a plutocratic to poverty weighting will increase the price level in the poor
relative to the rich country. Among a group of countries, all of which are relatively poor, this