(the SIRS model). This is the same as the SIR model above except that a term +sR
is added to the right-hand side of the first equation and -sR to the right-hand side of
the third equation, where s > 0 is a resusceptibility rate. In this model the infectives'
path may, depending on parameters, look similar to that in Figure 2 but approaching
a nonzero horizontal asymptote as time increases: the infectives never effectively
disappear. The SIR model can also be modified so that an encounter between a sus-
ceptible and an infected leads to an increase in exposed E, a fourth compartment,
who become infective later (the SEIR model). The model has also been modified to
incorporate partial immunity after cure, birth of new susceptibles, the presence of
superspreaders with very high contagiousness, geographical patterns of spread, etc.
V. Applications of the Kermack-McKendrick to Social Epidemics
In applying the compartmental model to social epidemics, to epidemics of ideas,
certain changes seem natural. One thought is that the contagion rate should decline
with time, as the idea becomes gradually less exciting. Another way of modeling
approximately the same notion is due to Daley and Kendall (1964, 1965), who said
that the Kermack-McKendrick model could be altered to represent that infectious
people might tend to become uninfectious after they meet another infectious person
or a recovered person, because they then think that many people now know the
story, making it no longer new and exciting, and thus they choose not to spread the
epidemic further.
Bartholomew (1982) argued that when variations of the Kermack-McKendrick
model are applied to the spread of ideas, we should not assume that ceasing to infect
others and forgetting are the same thing. Human behavior might be influenced by an
old idea not talked about much but still remembered. This has been called "behav-
ioral residue" (Berger 2013).
There is now a substantial economics literature on network models: see the recent
Handbook of the Economics of Networks (Bramoullé, Galeotti, and Rogers 2016),
though there appears to be little in the way of such behavioral models (the 