of these policies, especially QE, that most concerned US policymakers in real time.
My principal sources are FOMC minutes and transcripts, and a survey of FOMC
participants about the costs and risks of asset purchases that they discussed at their
December 2013 meeting. In retrospect, most of the costs and risks that concerned
policymakers and outside observers have not proved significant.12 The possible
exception is the risk of financial instability, which I leave to last.

Impairment of Market Functioning.—Central banks using QE have tried to

ensure that securities markets continue to function well, for example, by putting
limits on the fraction of individual issues eligible for  asset-purchase programs. The
JGB market in Japan has at times had very low activity outside of central bank purchases.
In the other major economies however there has been only limited evidence

of poor market functioning, absence of  two-way trade, or loss of price discovery.
Asset purchases likely improved market functioning during the global financial crisis
and during the European sovereign debt crisis, by adding liquidity, promoting
confidence, and strengthening the balance sheets of financial institutions.
High Inflation.—FOMC participants were appropriately skeptical of the crude
monetarism sometimes espoused in the early days of QE, which held that the large
increases in the monetary base associated with asset purchases—which are financed
by crediting banks’ reserve accounts at the central bank—would lead to runaway
inflation. Fed policymakers and staff understood that, with  short-term interest rates
near zero, the demand for bank reserves would be highly elastic and the velocity of
base money could be expected to fall sharply.13 However, some FOMC participants
did express concern about the possibility that the combination of extraordinary monetary
measures and large fiscal deficits could  unanchor inflationary expectations, the
determinants of which are poorly understood. This was a minority view and, of
course, inflation and inflation expectations remained low—often frustratingly so—
in all major jurisdictions despite the use of QE and other new tools.

Managing Exit.—FOMC participants worried about whether the expansion of the
Fed’s balance sheet could ultimately be reversed without disrupting markets, and
about how (in a mechanical sense)  short-term interest rates could be raised when the
time came to do so if banks remained inundated with reserves. The taper tantrum of
2013 would show that the communication around ending or reversing growth in the
central bank balance sheet can indeed be delicate. To bolster confidence both inside
and outside the Fed, Board staff and FOMC participants worked to develop methods
for raising the policy rate at the appropriate time—including the payment of interest
on bank reserves, which would ultimately become the key tool. These efforts largely
succeeded, as the Fed’s balance sheet has neared its new  steady-state level and rates
were raised from zero with only occasional and relatively minor disruptions thus