impact of narratives on the economy is regularly mentioned in journalistic circles,
but without the demands of academic rigor. The impact of journalistic accounts
of narratives may have been connected to aggressive forecasts which often proved
wrong. But, the advent of big data and of better algorithms of semantic search might
bring more credibility to the field.
Research in economics is already on its way to finding better quantitative meth-
ods to understand the impact of narratives on the economy. Textual search is a small
but expanding area in economic research. A search of the NBER Working Paper
database finds less than 100 papers with the words "textual analysis." Textual anal-
ysis has been used by economists, for example, to document changes in party affili-
ation (Kuziemko and Washington 2015); political polarization (Gentzkow, Shapiro,
and Taddy 2016); and news and speculative price movements (Roll 1988; Boudoukh
et al. 2013). But much more could be done. The historical analysis could be carried
further into databases of personal diaries, sermons, personal letters, psychiatrists'
patient notes, and social media.
There should be more serious efforts at collecting further time series data on
narratives, going beyond the passive collection of others' words, toward experi-
ments that reveal meaning and psychological significance. Since 1989, 1 have been
collecting some such data, on questionnaires about stock prices and home prices,
with open-ended questions that invite the respondent to write a sentence or two. The
questions are designed to stimulate the respondent to think about what is motivating
them, so that their responses can be analyzed in posterity. However, I would advo-
cate for there to be resources devoted to collecting data about narratives and public
reactions and understandings of narratives on a serious scale. It could be done with
focus groups and social media.
But this research still today needs improvement in tracking and quantifying narra-
tives. Researchers have trouble dealing with a set of often-conflicting narratives and
gradations and superposition of them. Even the simplest epidemic model shows that
no narratives reach everyone, and whom a particular narrative reaches and whom it
does not is largely random. The meanings of words depend on context and change
through time. The real meaning of a story, which accounts for its virality, may also
change through time and is hard to track in the long run.
There are serious issues of inferring causality, distinguishing between narratives
that are associated with economic behavior just because they are reporting on the
behavior, and narratives that create changes in economic behavior. These issues are
not insurmountable.34
Researchers have to grapple with issues that have troubled literary theorists.
Those theorists who, as noted above, try to list the basic stories in all of literature,
have to try to distill what it is that defines these stories, what makes them conta-
gious. There are so very many contagious stories at any time in history, and it is hard
to sort through them. The theorists run the risk of focusing on details of the stories
that are common just because the events are actually familiar in everyday life. They
also face the difficulty of accounting for changes through time in the li