understanding the all-important dynamics of infectious diseases. Their simplest
model divided the population into three compartments: susceptibles, infectives, and
recovereds, hence it is called an SIR model or compartmental model; S is the num-
ber of susceptibles, people who have not had the disease and are vulnerable; I is the
number of infectives, people who have the disease and are actively spreading it; R
is the number of recovereds, who have had the disease and gotten over it and are no
longer capable of catching the disease again or spreading it. The total population
N = S + I + Ris assumed constant.
The key idea of the Kermack-McKendrick mathematical theory of disease epi-
demics was that in a thoroughly mixing population the rate of increase of infectives
in a disease epidemic is equal to a constant contagion rate c > 0 times the product
of the number of susceptibles S and the number of infectives I minus a constant
recovery rate r > 0 times the number of infectives. Each time a susceptible meets
an infective there is a chance of infection. The number of such meetings per unit
of time depends on the number of susceptible-infective pairs in the population. The
recovery from the disease is assumed for simplicity to occur in an exponential decay
fashion, instead of the more usual notion of a relatively fixed timetable for the course
of the disease. The three-equation Kermack-McKendrick SIR model is
= -cSI'
dt
% = cSI-ri,
TT dt = rL
TT dt
The same SIR model can of course be used to describe the word-of-mouth trans-
mission of an idea. Here, the contagion rate is the fraction of the time in an encoun-
ter that an infective, a person interested in and accepting of a story, effectively
convinces the susceptible enough of the story to spread it further. Many encounters
may be needed before a particular person is infected. The removal rate might be
described as the rate of forgetting, of simple decay of memories, but there is also
cue-dependent forgetting. This removal also occurs as the repertory of other current
stories evolves away from this story, so that there are declining cues for the memory;
this story seems less connected, less apt, or even superficially contrary to current
theories and prejudices. It might be plausible to suppose, as the model does, that
contagion rates and removal rates are both constant through time, if they are intrin-
sic to the narrative. Inaccurate retellings of the narrative that leave out its essential
interest value, because of transmission error, just don't survive; the parameter c
refers to successful spread of the core interest value of a story.
Even though direct face-to-face communications of ideas is less important in
modern times because of the communications media, it still remains a workable
model. The core model may apply no matter how people may connect with each
other. A survey of individual investors shows that on average they talked to 20 peo-
ple about a typical investment, and only 23 percent did any analysis themselves
(Shiller and 