1084
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW APRIL 2022
renamed the company “Pixar.” To avoid bidding wars over employees, Lucasfilm 
and Pixar agreed (i) not to “cold call” each other’s employees; (ii) to notify the 
other company should they receive an application for employment; (iii) and that 
all offers to employees at the other company would be “final,” with no further bid-
ding. Ultimately this agreement was extended to other  high-tech firms (e.g., Google, 
Microsoft, and Oracle) and lasted over 20 years, until 2008.
The size of the settlement to affected engineers ($585 million in two suits), and 
other wage adjustments made after the agreement was made public (e.g., a 10 per -
cent  across-the-board increase offered by Google to all its employees in November 
2010) suggest that the suppression of  between-firm competition was successful—a 
validation of the idea that at least some labor markets are vulnerable to wage fixing.
Another interesting lawsuit concerned a “no hire” agreement between the medi-
cal schools at Duke University and University of North Carolina (Seaman v. Duke). 
This case, which resulted in a settlement of around $10,000 for each member of the 
medical faculties at the two schools, reveals how localized competition appears to 
matter, even for workers who arguably face a national market.
While one might be tempted to think that “no hire” and “no poaching” agree-
ments affect only highly skilled workers, Ashenfelter and Krueger (2021) found that 
no poaching clauses were widespread in US franchise agreements.17 These agree-
ments typically prohibit a franchisee from hiring another franchisee’s employees 
for some  prespecified period of time after an employee’s departure. For example, 
a standard franchise agreement for McDonald’s as of 2016 had a clause stating: 
“Franchisee shall not employ or seek to employ any person who is at the time 
employed by McDonald’s, any of its subsidiaries … or otherwise induce, directly 
or indirectly, such person to leave such employment” (quoted in Ashenfelter and 
Krueger 2021). The prohibition extended to employees for six months after leaving 
another McDonald’s job.
Another strand of recent research has focused on the prevalence of  noncompete 
agreements, which prohibit employees from moving to jobs at “competitor” firms 
for a specified period (e.g., Starr 2019; Balasubramanian et al. 2020). Again, a sur -
prising fact is the prevalence of these agreements even for relatively  low-wage work-
ers. Recently, however, a number of states have enacted legislation that prohibits 
 noncompete agreements for “ low-wage” workers (e.g., earning less than $100,000 
per year in Washington State—see Goldstein and Oberlander 2021).
The popularity of  no-poaching and  noncompete agreements seems to confirm the 
basic insights of a  BM-style job ladder model. Since the quit rate in such models 
depends in part on the rate at which workers obtain offers at other employers, limits 
on poaching or  firm-to-firm mobility will reduce quits and increase monopsonistic 
power.
V . An Agenda for the Future
It is presumptuous for anyone to try to influence the direction of research in a 
large and fractious field like labor economics. Nevertheless I have two suggestions 
17 Subsequent to the circulation of Ashenfelter and Krueger’s paper the Attorney General of the State of 
Washington took action to outlaw such contracts, and it appears that they are being eliminated in many contracts.