(column 4). The remaining gap at year 15 is reduced to around 22 log points when
time worked during the year is included and to 13 log points once work absences
and job tenure are added (columns 5 and 6).41

Of great importance with regard to the issues raised here is that annual earnings
are clearly nonlinear (convex) with respect to hours in year 15 but not in year 5. At
year 15 the coefficient on log hours in the log earnings regression is significantly
greater than one and that finding is robust to various specifications. In the column 5
specification with law school performance and weeks, the coefficient on log hours
is 1.34. It drops to 1.162 when job tenure, years out of the labor force, and years in
part-time employment are added. But the precise position chosen and thus the slope
of earnings with respect to weekly hours are determined by factors (e.g., children)
that in turn influence job interruptions and prior part-time work. The framework
necessitates a homogeneous group of individuals by training and those are given
here by the precise law school, performance in law school, completion of the JD,
and time since degree (15 years).

Because those who work in law firms usually report their hourly billing rate or fee
(about 90 percent do), columns 7 and 8 also include the relationship between hours
and the hourly fee reported. That, too, displays nonlinearity (convexity). The more
hours worked, the higher the hourly fee reported.

The nonlinearity of annual earnings with respect to hours worked and the relationship
between hourly earnings and hours are graphed in Figure 6 together with

characteristics of the JDs in each of four hour-intervals used (10-34, 35-44, 45-54,
and 55+ hours). The annual earnings graph bears a striking resemblance to the representation
of the framework in Figure 4. The nonlinearity of annual earnings with

respect to hours worked is clear.

The fraction female at 15 years is 0.288, but the fraction female decreases as
hours increase from 0.826 for the 0 to 34 hours group to 0. 182 for the 55 hours plus
group. The fraction of women who have children at 15 years out also decreases as
hours increase from 0.852 for the lowest hours bin to 0.536 for the highest. As hours
worked increase so does firm size and fraction partner, while the incidence of solo
practice decreases. Of some interest with respect to why nonlinearities in pay arise
with respect to hours worked, among JDs who work in a law firm twice the fraction
of time by the average lawyer is spent representing a Fortune 500 company in
the highest hours bin than in the smallest hours bin. Similarly, the fraction of time
representing "rich" people increases substantially (from about 0.025 to 0.09) when
a lawyer shifts from working part-time to full-time.

As in the case of MB As, the reason for the reduction in hours of work at 15 years
out is largely due to the arrival of children. And also similar to the MBA case is
that the decrease in participation is due to an interaction between children and the
income of the spouse. About 16.5 percent of JD women, and 21 percent of those
with children of any age, are not in the labor force by year 15.

Spousal income is an important determinant of who stays and who leaves employment
at year 15. JD women with children who are married to men in the upper 30

percent of the earnings distribution (more than $200K per year, in US$20
