All figures in this study apply to annual output and prices for 201 1 in 201 1 US$.
The figures are often provided with two or three significant digits, but this is for
presentational purposes and should be interpreted in the context of the uncertainties
inherent in modeling as well as the results of the sensitivity analyses discussed below.
First consider a Kyoto-type regime, with no sanctions when countries do not
participate, which is the first line in Table 1 . If the United States does not partici-
pate, it expends $0.3 billion per year for abatement and has reduced damages (from
all countries' abatement relative to zero abatement) of $7.3 billion per year. Net
climate-related benefits are $7.0 billion per year. In the no-sanctions regime, if the
US participates and sets a domestic carbon price of $25 per ton, it expends $1 1 .9 bil-
lion annually in abatement and has reduced damages of $10.7 billion per year, for
net climate-related benefits of -$1.2 billion annually. So without sanctions, the best
national strategy is not to participate, with an annual net advantage of $8.2 billion.
However, with a 4 percent penalty tariff on nonparticipants, the numbers change
dramatically. Here, the US has trade impacts of -$15.6 billion per year if it does
not participate. This comes primarily from the terms of trade losses induced by
tariffs on the US imposed by participants. If the US does participate, it has positive
trade impacts of $36.7 billion per year because it levies tariffs on the remaining
nonparticipants.
Taking the sum of climate-related gains and trade benefits with the 4 percent
penalty tariff, the US would have a positive impact of $35.5 billion per year as a
participant. By contrast, the US would have an annual impact of -$8.6 billion as a
nonparticipant. The US would have an incentive of a net gain $44.1 billion per year
to join the agreement taking account only of its own national economic benefit. In
this example, it is not even a close call on whether to participate.
The point of this simple example is to show that nations acting in their self-interest
would join a high-income club with a 4 percent tariff but would not join such a club
with a zero penalty tariff.
B. Basics of the Simulations
The central analysis undertaken here examines 44 different regimes for the Climate
Club. A regime in the following is defined as a combination of target carbon price
and tariff rate. The regimes analyzed here involve four different international target
carbon prices and 1 1 different tariff rates. The carbon prices are $12.5, $25, $50, and
$100 per ton of C02. While other values have been used in the literature, this s