The two-period economy with currency yielding an excessive real return can have
a low-employment equilibrium. Figure 16 shows one calculated with reasonable
parameter values. First-period consumption is below its level in the standard equilibrium.
That's not surprising, because the higher interest rate induces substitution
to later consumption. But second-period consumption is lower as well. Because
labor input is below full employment, the isoquant is closer to the origin.
Table 1 shows values of the variables in the two economies portrayed in Figure 16.
Unemployment in the first period in the economy with high-yielding currency
results in lower output. The amount of capital in use from period 1 to period 2, ku is
lower?thus raising its rate of return?and first-period consumption is lower?thus
raising the growth rate of consumption so as to satisfy the household's Euler equation
at the higher real return. Notice that the economy has full employment in the
second period. The labor/capital ratio that matters, n2/kx, is not depressed by lower
employment; it is raised by lower capital.

The existence of a low-employment equilibrium is not a given. The obstacle is
the need to generate a labor/capital ratio sufficiently higher than in the no-currency
equilibrium to make the rate of return on capital equal the higher level that currency
earns, despite having less labor. In other words, the first-period capital stock
kx needs to be proportionately lower by more than is the second-period employment
level, n2. In the two-period case, this condition is easy to satisfy?in the equilibrium
shown in Figure 16, second-period employment is at its full-employment level. With
lower first-period employment, the capital stock kx is lower because output is lower
and because the difference in first-period consumption is smaller than is the difference
in the capital stock.

C. Many Periods

Economies lasting over many (or an infinity of) periods are less likely to have a
low-employment intertemporal equilibrium. Two factors stand in the way of that
equilibrium. First, in the two-period case, a reduction in first-period output can cause
a meaningful proportional reduction in the capital stock carried from the first to the