Quinney 2004); narrative approaches to religious studies (Ganzevoort et al. 2013);
narrative criminology (Presser and Sandberg 2015); and so on. The overriding
theme is that people typically have little or nothing to say if you ask them to explain
their objectives or philosophy of life, but they brighten up at the opportunity to
tell personal stories, which then reveal much of their values (O'Conner 2000). For
example, if one interviews in a prison, one finds that the subject tends to respond
well when asked to tell stories about other criminals, and these stories tend to convey
a sense not of amorality but of altered morality.

Consideration of narratives in economics brings us to an unfamiliar association
with literature departments in our universities. Some literary theorists have found
that certain basic structures of stories are repeated constantly, though the names and
circumstances change from story to story, perhaps suggesting that the human brain
practically has receptors for certain stories built in. Cawelti (1976) classifies what
he calls "formula stories." Propp (1984) found 31 "functions" present in all folk stories.
Tobias (1999) says that in all of fiction there are only 20 master plots: "quest,
adventure, pursuit, rescue, escape, revenge, the riddle, rivalry, underdog, temptation,
metamorphosis, transformation, maturation, love, forbidden love, sacrifice, discovery,
wretched excess, ascension, and descensión." Booker (2004) argues that there
are only seven basic plots: "overcoming the monster, rags to riches, voyage and
return, comedy, tragedy, and rebirth." According to literary theorist Klages (2006,
p. 33), structuralism in literary theory takes such efforts to list all basic stories as
"overly reductive and dehumanizing." Although dismissing these lists of basic plots,
she asserts: "structuralists believe that the mechanisms which organize units and
rules into meaningful systems come from the human mind itself." Brooks (1992,
location 74) says narratology should be concerned with "how narratives work on
us, as readers, to create models of understanding, and why we need and want such
shaping orders." Well-structured narratives, Brooks (1992, location 749) argues,
"animate the sense-making process" and fulfill a "passion for meaning" and the
study of narratives brings him to psychoana
