asked to value each bet by naming the lowest price at which they would sell it if
they owned it, and also to choose which of the bets they would rather have. The term
"preference reversal" emerged from the fact that of those who preferred the p-bet,
a majority reported a higher selling price for the $-bet, implying that they valued it
more than the p-bet.
Grether and Plott (1979) were perplexed by this finding and set out to deter-
mine which mistake the psychologists must have made to obtain such an obviously
wrong result. Since the original study was based on hypothetical questions, one of
the hypotheses Grether and Plott investigated was whether the preference reversals
would disappear if the bets were played for real money. (They favored this hypoth-
esis in spite of the fact that Lichtenstein and Slovic (1973) had already replicated
their findings for real money on the floor of a Las Vegas casino.) What Grether
and Plott found surprised them. Raising the stakes did have the intended effect of
inducing the subjects to pay more attention to their choices (so noise was reduced)
but preference reversals did not thereby vanish; rather, their frequency went up! In
the nearly 40 years since Grether and Plott's seminal paper, I do not know of any
findings of "cognitive errors" that were discovered and replicated with hypothetical
questions but then vanished as soon as significant stakes were introduced.
C. The Invisible Handwave
There is a variation on the "if there is enough money at stake people will behave
like Econs" story that is a bit more complicated. In this version markets replace the
enlightening role of money. The idea is that when agents interact in a market envi-
ronment, any tendencies to misbehave will be vanquished. I call this argument the
"invisible handwave" because there is a vague allusion to Adam Smith embedded
in there somewhere, and I claim that it is impossible to complete the argument with
both hands remaining still.
Suppose, for example, that Homer falls prey to the "sunk cost fallacy" and always
finishes whatever is put on his plate for dinner, since he doesn't like to waste money.
An invisible handwaver might say, fine, he can do that at home, but when Homer
engages in markets, such misbehaving will be eliminated. Which raises the question:
how exactly does this occur? If Homer goes to a restaurant and finishes a rich des-
sert "because he paid for it" all that happens to him is that he gets a bit chubbier.
Competition does not solve the problem because there is no market for restaurants that
whisk the food away from customers as soon as they have eaten more than X calories.
Indeed, thinking that markets will eradicate aberrant behavior shows a failure to
understand how markets work. Let's consider two possible strategies firms might
adopt in the face of consumers making errors. Firms could try to teach them about
the costs of their errors or could devise a strategy to exploit the error to make higher
profits. The latter strategy will almost always be more profitable. As a rule it is eas-
ier to cater to biases than to eradicate them. DellaVigna and Malmendier (2006)
provide an instructive example in their article "Paying Not to Go to the Gym." The
authors study the usage of customers of three gyms that offer members the choice of
paying $70 a month for unlimited usage, or a package of 10 entry tickets for $100.
They find that the members paying the monthly fee go to the gym an average of 4.3
times per month, implying an average cost of over $17 