Both Delphic and Odyssean guidance have potentially important roles when
policymakers confront the lower bound on rates. Delphic guidance that helps the
public better understand the central bank’s reaction function may be valuable at the
lower bound since—given the “history dependence” of optimal monetary policy
(Woodford 2013)—the responses of monetary policymakers to a given configuration
of inflation and employment after a period at the lower bound may be quite different
than during  more normal times. Odyssean guidance is useful at the lower bound
because optimal monetary policy in those circumstances may be at least somewhat
time-inconsistent, in the sense of Kydland and Prescott (1977)—that is, at the lower
bound, monetary policymakers may want to commit to  interest-rate paths or to other
actions from which they will have incentives to deviate in the future.
For example, when  short-term rates cannot be reduced further, policymakers
may want to put downward pressure on  longer-term rates by persuading mar -
ket participants that they intend to keep the policy rate at the lower bound for an
extended period—a  so-called  lower-for-longer policy—even if that involves a
possible ( time-inconsistent) overshoot of their inflation target. As I will discuss,
lower-for-longer policies are in turn closely related to  so-called makeup strategies,
in which policymakers promise to compensate for protracted undershoots of their
inflation or employment goals by a period of overshoot (Yellen 2018). Odyssean
guidance can make such commitments clear and create a reputational stake for the
central bank to follow through.
In the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis, most examples of forward guidance
were qualitative, using language similar to Greenspan’s “considerable period”
rather than precisely specifying the future path of rates or the conditions under which
rates would be raised. Some research has criticized the Fed’s guidance during this
time. Woodford (2012) argued that the guidance in the FOMC’s policy statements
lacked sufficient commitment to be effective—that is, the language was Delphic
when it should have been Odyssean. Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015)
noted that, in  2009–2010, private (Blue Chip) forecasters continued to believe that
the Fed intended to begin raising rates relatively soon, notwithstanding (qualitative)
guidance to the contrary; according to these authors, the forecasters’ beliefs evidently
reflected both a misunderstanding of the Fed’s reaction function and excessive
optimism about the likely speed of the recovery. Campbell et al. (2017) concluded
that Fed forward guidance only became Odyssean (that is, effectively committing to
lower for longer) in 2011, at which point it began to lead to better macroeconomic
outcomes. Gust et al. (2017) similarly found, in the context of an estimated dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, that market participants only gradually
understood the FOMC’s  lower-for-longer message. Supporting the critics’ view
is that, despite the Fed’s efforts to talk down rates, the  two-year Treasury yield—
an indicator of  near-term monetary policy expectations—remained near 1 percent
through the spring of 2010, declining only gradually after that.
Over time, the FOMC pushed back against the excessively hawkish expectations
of market participants with more precise and aggressive forward guidance. In
August 2011, the FOMC for the first time explicitly tied its guidance to a date, indicating
that it would keep the fed funds rate near zero “at least through  mid-2013.”
In January 2012 it extended that commitment “at least through late 2014,” and
in September 2012 it extended the commitment yet again to “at l