962
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW APRIL 2020
Distributional Considerations.—FOMC participants did not often discuss dis-
tributional considerations—mainly, the effects of low interest rates on savers and 
the purported tendency of the new monetary tools to increase inequality—nor were 
these concerns included in the internal 2013 FOMC survey about potential costs. 
However, these issues were (and remain) prominent in the political debate in the 
United States and several other countries. Most policymakers believe that monetary 
policies that promote economic recovery have broadly felt benefits, including higher 
employment, wages, profits, capital investment, and tax revenues; lower borrowing 
costs; and reduced risk of unwanted disinflation or even a deflationary trap. Given 
these benefits, it would be unwise to avoid accommodative monetary policies even 
if they did have some adverse distributional implications. In any case, the research 
literature is close to unanimous in its finding that the distributional effects of expan-
sionary monetary policies are small, once all channels are considered, and may even 
work in a progressive direction, for example by promoting a “hot” labor market.14 
Inequality is primarily structural and slowly evolving rather than cyclical, and as 
such should be addressed by the fiscal authorities and other policymakers, not cen-
tral banks.
Capital Losses.—The large, unhedged holdings of  longer-term securities asso-
ciated with asset purchase programs risked substantial capital losses if interest 
rates had risen unexpectedly, losses which in turn could have ultimately reduced 
the Federal Reserve’s remittances of profits to the Treasury.15 The social costs of 
any such losses would probably have been small: they would not have affected the 
ability of the Fed to operate normally, and—even ignoring offsetting gains to inves-
tors—government revenue gains from a stronger economy would have more than 
compensated for reduced remittances. Nevertheless, FOMC participants worried 
about the political fallout and threats to Fed independence that large losses could 
have produced.16
Several factors mitigated but did not eliminate this risk. First, a significant por -
tion of the Fed’s liabilities—namely currency—pays no interest, providing some 
cushion to the Fed’s ability to make payments to the Treasury. Additional cushion 
is provided by securities owned by the Fed prior to the introduction of QE, which 
enjoyed capital gains when yields fell. Second, since the Fed earns the  long-term 
interest rate on its holdings of bonds but pays the  short-term interest rate on bank 
reserves, it earns a net positive return when the yield curve has its normal upward 
14 On the distributional effects of monetary policy, see, for example, Bivens (2015) for the United States, 
Ampudia et al. (2018) for the euro area, and Bunn, Pugh, and Yeates (2018) for the United Kingdom. Aaronson et 
al. (2019) documents the benefits to  lower-wage workers of a “hot” labor market. The argument that easy money 
increases wealth inequality is slightly more plausible than that it increases income inequality, because of its effects 
on asset prices. Note though that the benefits to asset holders of higher asset prices are partially offset by the lower 
returns they can earn on their wealth.
15 Assuming that securities are held to maturity, the effect on remittances would be indirect, arising only at the 
point that the  short-term rate paid by the Fed on reserves rises sufficiently relative to the returns on its portfolio. See 
Bonis, Fiesthumel, and Noonan (2018). Cavallo et al. (2018) discusses the fiscal implications of the Fed’s balance 
sheet under various scenarios.
16 In the United Kingdom, the central bank was backstopped by the Treasury, but there were no such arrange-
ments in the United States or, to my knowledge, in other major economies. Such arrangements avoid direct capital 
losses on the central bank’s balance sheet but have the downside of possibly compromising the independence of 
monetary policy. Also, a Treasury backstop does not necessarily avoid adverse political consequences since the 
taxpayer still bears the ultimate costs if losses occur.