C. Product Prices and Real Wage Rates

If real wage rates differ from place to place, then the prices of nontradable goods
will also differ from place to place. Prices of nontradables must differ because local
wage rates indicate the cost of a factor of production that is important in producing
a nontradable good. These input price differences will thus result in output price dif
ferences. This point is very important for understanding what price deflator is appro
priate for the computation of a real wage. The simplest version of this phenomenon,
often known as the Balassa-Samuelson effect,6 is based on the observation that if
tradable goods prices are the same everywhere, and if productivity differs in the
production of tradable goods, then the prices of nontradable goods must differ too.
This results because the equality of wage rates between workers in the tradable and
nontradable sectors within a country makes labor intensive goods more expensive to
produce in high-productivity countries.

Consider a product produced according to a Cobb-Douglas production function
from a combination of both tradable goods and local labor that is paid wage w0i. The
cost of producing such a good will be

(3)

„ ,A,a 1 -a

Pni — w0 iP s

where pni is the price of the quasi-tradable good, p is the (constant across places)
price of tradable goods, and 0 < a < 1 is the fraction of the cost of production that
is due to local labor. Equation (3) describes the price of the quasi-tradable good as a
concave function of the local wage. A real wage defined as

(4)  Woi/Pni = (Wqí/pY a,

is a purchasing-power-panty price adjusted wage, where the weights in the purchas
ing power basket are allocated in the proportion a and 1 — a to nontradables and
tradables. This index is a concave function of the wage rate measured in the tradable
price and it will thus show a smaller gap between high- and low-wage countries than
would a real wage rate measured in tradable prices. It is natural to think of the trad
able goods-based wage rate, w0i/p, as being measured by the wage rate expressed in
a common currency, since exchange rates are meant to equate the prices of tradable
goods. It is this wage rate that should be linked to the marginal product of labor and
TFP. Likewise, it is natural to think of the quasi-tradable goods-based wage rate, w0l
/pni, as more closely related to the welfare of workers as represented by a constant
utility real wage index.

IV. Measuring McWages

To demonstrate how a well-defined real wage rate may be used, I have been col
lecting data on wages (and prices) from McDonald's restaurants since 1998. Perhaps
the most famous statement of the identical nature of the items McDonald's sells