rights until some days after the child is born. It of course happens in some cases that
the surrogate chooses to retain parental rights, including custody of the child.
For these reasons and others, there is a lively market in “fertility tourism” to
places where surrogacy is legal and reliable, such as California. In California there are reliable commercial contracts that permit surrogate parents to pay a surrogate, and be named as parents on the California birth certificate.
96
There have also been thriving markets for surrogacy in Asia, but some of the
countries that hosted many fertility tourists are now outlawing commercial surro-gacy for foreign parents.
Thus, the repugnance associated with surrogacy is complex.
97 Some repugnance
focuses on issues related to the rights of children and the regulation of family formation,
while other concerns focus on the rights of surrogates, and the potential that they can be exploited. These latter concerns motivate laws against compensating surrogates. Note that in jurisdictions that permit surrogacy but forbid compensa-tion, a transaction that is apparently not repugnant when supplied for free becomes repugnant when money is added. This isn’t such an uncommon distinction, (e.g.,
prostitution is banned in many places where promiscuity is allowed, and charging interest on loans was repugnant in the middle ages, although loans were allowed), and is related to concerns about exploitation and coercion.
98 Similar concerns arise
in connection with bans against compensating kidney donors.
V . Kidney Exchange
Kidney failure (End Stage Renal Disease, or ESRD) is a major cause of death
in both the developed and developing world. Care for ESRD is a $50 billion a year industry in the United States, and takes up about 7 percent of the Medicare budget. Transplantation is the treatment of choice: dialysis can extend a patient’s life but is hardly a cure for ESRD, while most patients can resume an essentially healthy life after receiving a transplant (Liyange et al. 2015; USRDS 2017).
Around 100,000 American patients are on the waiting list for a deceased donor
transplant, but in 2017 only about 14,000 deceased donor kidneys were transplanted, while around 8,000 patients either died while waiting or were removed from the waiting list after becoming too sick to transplant. Healthy people have two kidneys and can remain healthy with one, so live donation is a very practical possibility, and in 2017 almost 6,000 living transplants were performed in the United States.
99