earnings gap.35 Individuals who work long hours in these occupations receive a disproportionate
increase in earnings. That is, the elasticity of earnings with respect to

hours worked is greater than one.

In previous work, Katz and I (2008b) demonstrated that among Harvard College
graduates, the penalty to time out of the labor market differs greatly by occupation.
Among those who received their BAs around 1990, a 10 percent hiatus in employment
time 15 years after the BA, thus amounting to an 18-month break, was associated
with a decrease in earnings of 41 percent for those with an MBA, 29 percent
for those with a JD or a PhD, and 15 percent for those with an MD.36 In addition,
the reduction in earnings from time off for MDs was linear in lost experience but
was discrete (nonlinear) for MBAs. Any time off for MBAs is heavily penalized. We
also found that MDs and PhDs took the shortest non-work spells after a birth and
MBAs took the longest. That is, those with the greatest penalty to time out also took
the most time out, largely because their jobs did not enable shorter or more flexible
schedules.

In this section I expand on these findings and explore the widening gender gap
in pay with age and differences in the gender gap by occupation using data sets
specific to occupations and degrees. I will demonstrate that some occupations have
high penalties for even small amounts of time out of the labor force and have nonlinear
earnings with respect to hours worked. Other occupations, however, have small
penalties for time out and almost linear earnings with respect to hours worked. In
the first group of occupations are individuals who have earned an MBA or a JD. In
the second group - the occupations with lower penalties for time out and the more
linear ones - is one in the health sector (pharmacy).

The data sets I use are for fairly uniform groups of men and women who have
received the same advanced degree or work in the same occupation. The information
on job experience and time worked is highly detailed. The gender gap in annual earnings
for the JDs and MBAs, although large by year 15, is almost entirely explained
by various factors, such as hours worked, time out of the labor force, and years spent
in part-time employment. Small differences in time away or in hours translate into
large differences in pay. Nonlinearities in pay with respect to time worked can be
seen. For the pharmacists, however, hours worked is also of importance in explaining
gender differences in pay but earnings are fairly linear in time worked and time
out of the labor force is of less importance to contemporaneous pay. In fact, because
part-time work is prevalent in pharmacy, women do not take off much time.

A. Business (MBA): Nonlinear Occupations

At the start of their careers, earnings by gender are almost identical among MBAs
graduating from the University of Chicago Booth School from 1990 to
