can take an initiative that others are then compelled to follow. J. P. Morgan voluntarily started
publishing quarterly accounts of his steel corporation; laws requiring this were enacted later
by the reforming administration of Theodore Roosevelt (Jean Strouse 2000, 439). Recently the
CEO of AFLAC allowed the company's shareholders to vote on his compensation; this practice
may also spread. (3) Media, public interest litigation, and people's courts can help, but they can
also hurt if they pursue some special interest, e.g., the environment or some perceived rights of
some small groups, too far to the detriment of more general interests. (4) Crises are conducive to
change because they destroy existing special interests (Olson 1982); but not many people recommend
engineering a crisis in the hope of facilitating institutional reform. Competition also forces
change (North 1990).
But these insights do not constitute an overall framework for understanding institutional
change. Much more research is needed to achieve that. Such research will have to combine many
disciplinary perspectives?economics, history, political science, sociology, psychology, anthropology,
law, and evolutionary biology?and use many methodologies?case studies and analytic
narratives, statistical empirical studies, and theoretical modeling using both rational choice and
behavioral approaches. This is an ambitious but exciting endeavor and an important one both
scientifically and in its potential practical applications, and I hope this paper will stimulate many
economists and other social scientists to contribute to it.
VII. Recommendations for Reforms
Everyone wants an essay like this to conclude with practical recommendations for policy and
institutional reform or design. This is very difficult because research on governance institutions
is very much a work in progress. Case studies and theory alike show a great diversity of possible
remedies and the contexts to which they may apply. Each case is different in many important
ways, but there are also some broad themes common to them all. The general and the particular
must be combined appropriately in each situation. Any recommendations at the level of this
article must be correspondingly broad, vague, and tentative: suggestions rather than prescriptions.
With this proviso, here are a few, which summarize some arguments and remarks made
earlier and add some concluding thoughts.
A. Suggestions for Investors and Traders
A businessman who comes from economies with well-functioning formal governance is likely
to find the relation-based informal institutions in many less-developed countries and transition
economies bewildering, and is likely to make mistakes. He can avoid these mistakes by using
a local partner with established ties to social networks. Of course, he must first find and build
a relationship with a partner, and then must share the surplus with the partner appropriately to
maintain an honest equilibrium. But this cost is still likely to be less than the cost of losing the
investment because the property right or the contract cannot be enforced in the formal system.
This observation also suggests that businessmen from one country with poor formal governance
will have an advantage in investing or trading with another, as compared to those who come from
countries with good formal governance. They may not know the precise customs and may not be
insiders to the relationships in the other country, but they are better aware of the need to learn the
customs and build the relationships. This may explain some of the recent success of multinationals
from these countries when it comes to making foreign direct investments?their specific asset is
the entrepreneurial and managerial skill in navigating economic systems with poor governance.
Where the institutions and agents of the host country government are predatory, investors
and traders have to cope with this, or attempt collective action to resist the extortion. This has