In recent years there has been growing interest in the mixture of psychology
and economics that has come to be known as "behavioral economics." As is true
with many seemingly overnight success stories, this one has been brewing for quite
a while. My first paper on the subject was published in 1980, hot on the heels of
Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) blockbuster on prospect theory, and there were
earlier forerunners, most notably Simon (1955, 1957) and Katona (1951, 1953).
The rise of behavioral economics is sometimes characterized as a kind of
paradigm-shifting revolution within economics, but I think that is a misreading of
the history of economic thought. It would be more accurate to say that the method-
ology of behavioral economics returns economic thinking to the way it began, with
Adam Smith, and continued through the time of Irving Fisher and John Maynard
Keynes in the 1930s.
In spite of this early tradition within the field, the behavioral approach to eco-
nomics met with considerable resistance within the profession until relatively
recently. In this essay I begin by documenting some of the historical precedents
for utilizing a psychologically realistic depiction of the representative agent. I then
turn to a discussion of the many arguments that have been put forward in favor of
retaining the idealized model of Homo economicus even in the face of apparently
contradictory evidence. I argue that such arguments have been refuted, both theo-
retically and empirically, including in the realm where we might expect rationality
to abound: the financial markets. As such, it is time to move on to a more construc-
tive approach.
On the theory side, the basic problem is that we are relying on one theory to
accomplish two rather different goals, namely to characterize optimal behavior
and to predict actual behavior. We should not abandon the first type of theories as
they are essential building blocks for any kind of economic analysis, but we must
augment them with additional descriptive theories that are derived from data rather
than axioms.
As for empirical work, the behavioral approach offers the opportunity to develop
better models of economic behavior by incorporating insights from other social sci-
ence disciplines. To illustrate this more constructive approach, I focus on 