auction for radio spectrum. Computational speed also helps deal with congestion.
Ads can be matched with internet users by auctions that run quickly enough to keep up with internet attention spans, and stable matchings can be determined without delay. But computerized markets can also increase congestion by easing access, e.g., by increasing the number of job applications it is easy for a job seeker to send. How will computerized speed and intelligence influence the scope and scale of mar -
ketplaces? How will artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques help automate parts of market design?
121 Somewhat separately, as computers become
increasingly important as infrastructure for markets and capital equipment for firms, markets for computation, such as cloud computing, may fundamentally change some
of the make or buy decisions of firms, and how computers are owned and accessed.
Privacy issues arise with special force when markets are computerized, because
computerized markets can create “big” data of participants’ behavior, both of con-ventional sorts (prices, transactions, buyers, sellers) and new sorts (e.g., clickstream and cookie data on search behavior, and location and social network data). There are already markets for these data, connected not only to advertising, but to other kinds of marketing (such as marketing candidates to voters). These data can be combined with other data in ways that allow individuals to be tracked in detail. So a big question for all marketplaces, but especially those that are computerized, is: how can and should privacy be preserved? A technical literature on differential privacy addresses the extent to which privacy can be preserved by databases that employ some randomness (see, e.g., Dwork and Roth 2014). Related questions have to do with markets for individualized data (or, conversely, privacy). These present import-
ant unresolved conceptual difficulties. For example, individuals’ privacy may be correlated with their value for privacy, i.e., a marketplace that allows individuals to implicitly or explicitly express a reservation value for their data may cause individ-uals to reveal their data even when they decline to sell it. As Ghosh and Aaron Roth (2015) put it: “An individual’s cost for privacy may itself be private information. Suppose that Alice visits an oncologist, and subsequently is observed to signifi-cantly increase her value for privacy…”
Rules are data for the study of how marketplaces are designed, and the com-
puterization of marketplaces also gives us access to data on market rules, precisely encoded in algorithms and apps. Contracts are data too, and contracts are what is for sale in many marketplaces, including computerized marketplaces. The increased availability of precisely coded rules and contracts may lead to an explosion of empir -
ical game theory, parallel to the growth of applied microeconomic research fostered by big datasets of individual behavior.
Repugnance and its causes and consequences are worth much further study.
Economists often shrink from having third parties prevent voluntary transact