Underestimates of the natural unemployment rate and overestimates of the sacrifice ratio
are connected. When the Fed underestimates the natural rate and overestimates the unemployment
 gap, it overpredicts the amount of disinflation. That causes it to revise its estimate of the
slope of the Phillips curve toward zero. Thus, Orphanides's story about the consequences of
misestimating the natural rate of unemployment complements Primiceri's story about sacrifice
ratio pessimism.
C. An Eclectic Account
The stories in the previous two sections take stands on both the true and the government's
approximating models. Cogley and Sargent (2005) perform an exercise that does not require
specifying a true data-generating mechanism, the empirical distribution being enough. But the
government's views about the consequences of choosing alternative feasible policies continue to
play the leading role. The government's model f(ycc,vcc\0) mixes three submodels according to
Bayesian posterior probabilities that are included in the vector 0t.
A government entertains three models that Cogley and Sargent use to capture prominent specifications
 from the literature about US unemployment-inflation dynamics described by King and
Watson (1994). The models are (1) a Samuelson-Solow Phillips curve with King and Watson's
Keynesian direction of fit, a model that implies a long-run exploitable trade-off between inflation
 and unemployment; (2) a Solow-Tobin model with a Keynesian direction of fit that features
a short-run but no long-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment (albeit according to
what Lucas (1972a) and Sargent (1971) claimed was an unsound notion of long-run); and (3) a
Lucas specification with a classical direction of fit that implies no exploitable trade-off between
inflation and unemployment. If the Lucas model has probability one, the Phelps problem gives
the trivial solution that the government should set the systematic part of inflation equal to zero. If
either of the other models has probability one, the systematic part of inflation is a linear function
of the state variables appearing in those exploitable dynamic Phillips curves. The government
attaches positive probability to all three models, so the Phelps problem brokers a compromise
among the recommendations of the three models. But what kind of compromise? It depends on
submodel probabilities multiplied by value functions.
The government starts with a prior that has non-zero weights on all three models in 1960, then
each period uses Bayes's law to update parameters of each of the three submodels and also its
prior over the submodels.37 In each period, the government solves a Phelps problem that penalizes
 inflation and unemployment and that uses its time t submodel probabilities to average over
its time t estimates of its three submodels. Cogley and Sargent put prior probabilities in 1960
of 0.98 on the Samuelson-Solow model and 0.01 each on the Solow-Tobin and the Lucas model.
We set those low prior probabilities on the Lucas and Solow-Tobin models because only the
Samuelson-Solow model existed in I960.38 Applying this machine to US inflation-unemployment
 data, Cogley and Sargent computed time series of both the posterior model weights ait and
the systematic part of the inflation rate set by the government in the Phelps problem.