that such models will make good predictions in other markets where arbitrage is
impossible. So what should happen to economic theoryThe
problem is that we are asking our theories to do two different tasks. The first
is to solve for optimal solutions to problems, the other is to describe how Humans
actually choose. Of course in a world consisting only of Econs there would be no
need for two different kinds of models. Economic agents would have the courtesy to
make the optimal choices that the model determines are best (at least on average).
But we are far from that world: We Humans struggle both to determine what the best
choice would be and then to have enough willpower to implement that choice, especially
if it requires delay of gratification. So we need descriptive economic theories.
The first and most successful such theory is Kahneman and Tverksy's (1979)
prospect theory, which has had an enormous impact on both economics and social
science more generally.8 Beyond the insights of the model itself, prospect theory
provides a template for the new class of theories we need. Expected utility theory
remains the gold standard for how decisions should be made in the face of risk.
Prospect theory is meant to be a complement to expected utility theory, which tell us
how people actually make such choices. Using one theory for both purposes makes
no more sense then using a hammer both to pound nails and to apply paint.
Some economists might think that without optimization there can be no theory,
but in a cogent essay Arrow (1986) rejected this idea. "Let me dismiss a point of
view that is perhaps not always articulated but seems implicit in many writings. It
seems to be asserted that a theory of the economy must be based on rationality, as a
matter of principle. Otherwise there can be no theory." Arrow noted that there could
be many rigorous, formal theories based on behavior that economists would not be
willing to call rational. He also pointed out the inconsistency of an economic theorist
who toils for months to derive the optimal solution to some complex economic
problem and then blithely assumes that the agents in his model behave as if they
are naturally capable of solving the same problem. "We have the curious situation
that scientific analysis imputes scientific behavior to its subjects. This need not be a
contradiction, but it does seem to lead to an infinite regress."
This is not the place, and I am not the person, to present a detailed roadmap
of what a behavioral approach to economic theory should be, but perhaps a few
brief thoughts are appropriate. The first is that behavioral economic theories (or
any descriptive theories) must abandon the inductive reasoning that is the core of
neoclassical theories and instead adopt a deductive approach in which hypotheses
and assumptions are based on observations about human behavior. In other words,
behavioral economic theory must be evidence-based theory. The evidence upon
which these theories can be based can come from psychology or other social sciences
or it can be homemade. Some might worry about basing theories on empirical
observation, but this methodology has a rich tradition in science. The Copernican
revolution, which placed the sun at the center of our solar system rather than the
earth, was based on data regarding the movement of the planets, not on some first
princ