global and independent of where emissions take place. An additional complication
is that the abatement costs are paid today while most of the benefits of abatement
come in the distant future. The present study shows, in a stylized model of costs and
damages, that the global noncooperative carbon price and abatement rate are proportional
to the Herfindahl index of country size. This implies, given realistic data,
that the global noncooperative carbon price and control rate will be in the order of
one-tenth of the efficient cooperative levels.

Next consider possible mechanisms to combat free-riding and focus on a Climate
Club. It is generally assumed that the most effective approach will be to impose trade
sanctions on nonparticipants, and this is the route followed here. Most trade sanctions
rely on duties on carbon-intensive goods. For strategic, economic, and technical reasons,
this paper instead considers penalties that take the form of uniform ad valorem
tariffs levied by club participants on nonparticipants. In the analysis, the tariff rates
vary from 0 percent to 10 percent. It is further assumed that a climate treaty will
amend trade rules so that a penalty tariff conforms with international trade law and
retaliation by nonparticipants is prohibited.

This study assumes that countries adopt an international carbon-price target rather
than a quantity target as the policy instrument. The assumed target price ranges from
$12.5-$ 100 per ton C02. In the experiments, the international target carbon price is
always set equal to the global social cost of carbon.

Individual countries are assumed to adopt climate policies that maximize their
national economic welfare. Welfare equals standard income less damages less
abatement costs less the costs of trade sanctions. I assume a one-shot static game,
but this can be interpreted as the stage game of a repeated game. The equilibrium,
described as a coalition Nash equilibrium, is a coalition of countries that is stable
against any combination of joiners and defectors. The equilibrium is calculated by
an evolutionary algorithm that tests each coalition against a random collection of
countries that can defect and join.

The study introduces a new approach called the C-DICE model (Coalition

DICE, or Coalition Dynamic Integrated Model of Climate and the Economy). It is
a 15-region model with abatement, damages, international trade, and the economic
impacts of tariffs. Using an evolutionary algorithm, the model can be used to find
stable coalition Nash equilibria.

B. Qualifications

I begin with qualifications on the results that relate to the data and structural
parameters. The data on output, C02 emissions, and trade are relatively well measured.
The global SCC is uncertain but can be varied as shown in the different

experiments. The national SCCs are also uncertain, but since they are all small
relative to the global SCC, their exact magnitudes are not critical for the findings.
Other structural uncertainties relate to the abatement cost function and the optimal
tariff rate.

A related question is whether a trade-penalty-plus-carbon-price regime can operate
in the future with the rising carbon prices that are generally associated with an
efficient climate-change program. Answering this question requires a multiperiod
coalition model and is on the agenda for future r
