slope. Third, the taxpayer is hedged against Fed capital losses in the sense that a rise
in  longer-term yields is more likely to occur when the economy is strengthening,
which increases tax revenues. (However, some FOMC participants worried about a
sudden, spontaneous rise in long rates—the bursting of the “bond bubble.”) In fact,
the Fed’s asset purchase programs proved hugely profitable, with net profits result-
ing in remittances to the Treasury totaling about $800 billion between 2009 and
2018, about triple  pre-crisis rates. Such an outcome, though likely, was not guar -
anteed, and the risk of capital losses is likely to remain a concern for policymakers
involved in large  asset-purchase programs.17
Financial Instability.—FOMC participants worried that  post-crisis monetary pol-
icies raised risks of financial instability—a natural concern, given the recentness and
largely unpredicted nature of the global financial crisis. Many mechanisms linking
monetary policy to stability risks were suggested, including but not limited to the
creation of asset bubbles; incentivizing “reach for yield” and excessive  risk-taking
by investors; the promotion of excessive leverage or maturity transformation; and
the destabilization of the business models of insurance companies and pension
funds, which rely on receiving adequate  long-run returns, and of banks, whose prof-
its depend in part on their ability to earn positive net interest margins. US central
bankers also heard frequently from their foreign counterparts, especially in emerg-
ing markets, about the “spillover effects” of Fed policies on financial conditions
abroad (Rey 2013).
We are far from a full understanding of the links between monetary policy and
financial stability. A good bit of evidence suggests that monetary easing works in
part by encouraging private actors to take risks—the  so-called  risk-taking channel
(Borio and Zhu 2012). Easy money increases  risk-taking through several mech-
anisms: it improves the overall economic outlook and reduces downside risks; it
strengthens bank and borrower balance sheets, which increases the willingness of
lenders to extend credit; and it reduces the cost of liquidity, which complements
risk-taking by banks (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2018). Increased  risk-taking
is by no means always a bad thing, of course: encouraging banks, borrowers, and
investors to take reasonable risks, rather than hoarding cash and hunkering down, is
a desirable goal for policies aimed at ending a recession or crisis and restoring nor -
mal growth. However,  risk-taking may become excessive if investors and lenders are
less than perfectly rational about trading off risk and return, if institutional arrange-
ments distort incentives for  risk-taking, or if there are externalities associated with
increased leverage or illiquidity (Stein 2013). So these concerns can hardly be dis-
missed; indeed, given the economic damage that a financial crisis can cause, we
must be humble about our understanding and remain vigilant for building risks.
There is a lively debate, which I will not try to resolve here, about the extent
to which monetary policymakers should take financial stability considerations into
account when setting interest rates (Svensson 2016; Gourio, Kashyap, and Sim
2017; Adrian and Liang 2018). Most participants in that debate agree that the first
17 The fiscal gains from asset purchases has occasionally led to the opposite critique, that by buying government
debt and remitting profits, central banks are “enabling” irresponsible fiscal policymakers. The Fed’s view—which I
believe is appropriate—is that it is not the central bank’s job to dictate fiscal choices to elected legislators.