and the budget constraint becomes

(41)

Qt vt + 1

a-. - r, + gt.

Because these systems with non-trivial 6 become difficult to handle analytically,
we omit laying out the first order conditions for the consol-debt case, and we solve,
numerically, locally linearized versions of both the short debt and long debt models.
We assume g, is independent across time, with constant mean Eg, = ~g = 1. We set
p = /?_1 = 1.1, and r = 2 in the initial steady state. Because this makes r — ~g = 1,
and the net real rate p — 1 =0.1, initial steady state real debt b = 10.

With real debt, as in Barro's (1979) original framework (i.e., 0 — oo), a unit
increase in g, above its mean ~g requires r and b to move to new levels that could be
sustained forever if future g values reverted to ~g. So with our parameter settings,
10/11 of the g shock goes into b, 1/11 into r. The increased ris exactly enough
to service the increased debt at the 10 percent interest rate. The new values of b
and T are sustained forever in the absence of new shocks. The interest rate remains
constant.

At the opposite extreme, with perfectly flexible prices (9 = 0) and nominal debt,
optimal policy absorbs all of the fiscal surprise in surprise inflation. The inflation
proportionally reduces the real value of maturing debt, which is 11, and must be
sufficient to offset the unit increase in g, since r will optimally not change at all.
The result is an inflation of 10 percent, with b, r, and the interest rate all unchanged.
The inflation is limited to the initial period, after that returning to zero. Here again,
the interest rate remains constant.

With oj = 10, optimal policy depends on whether we have one-year or consol

debt. With one-year debt, optimal policy allows 43 percent of the g shock to flow
into b and permanently adjusts r by 4.3 percent, to cover the increased debt ser
vice. This leaves some of the g shock unaccounted for, though, and that is absorbed
in a one-time surprise inflation of 4.8 percent. And once again the interest rate
remains constant.

With u = 10 and consol debt, only 6.9 percent of the g shock passes into increased
b, and r increases by only 0.69 percent. Most of the shock is absorbed by simultane
ous, permanent small increases in the nominal interest rate (1/(2) ar>d the inflation
rate. The interest rate increases by 0.84 percentage points and the inflation rate by
0.76 percentage points. These small changes in the interest rate and the inflation rate
are enough to create a capital loss for consol holders that offsets most of the g shock.
It may seem, since the interest rate increases by more than the inflation rate, that
the real rate has increased, even though we have assumed constant p. However, this
happens only because of the definition of the "nominal rate" as \/Q. This is a good
approximation when there is no inflation, but when there is steady inflation, as in the
wake of this shock, a consol's constant stream of nominal payments is front-loaded
in real terms, so that in fact the constant real rate is preserved by this combination of
permanent changes in inflation and 1 /Q.

The response to the g shock in the four cases we have discussed in the preceding
paragraphs is displayed in Figure 2. Each column of plots shows the time path of
changes in the four variables listed on the left side of the chart, in the case labeled at