pay scale giving wage rates depending on seniority; in this case the midpoint or
that scale was taken as the wage rate. Finally, in a few countries it was necessary
to estimate an hourly wage rate based on an average monthly salary divided by
average hours worked.

Although the reliability of these data is hard to assess at a general level, there is
quite a bit of anecdotal evidence to support the estimates shown below. It is straight
forward to compare our estimates of Big Mac prices with those that the Economist
magazine has reported for many years. The correlation averages about 0.99. Other
evidence comes from personal data collection, often provided by economists who
have eaten in a McDonald's restaurant.

B. Comparisons to Other Wage Data

One direct way to assess the reliability of these data is to compare them to
what other data already exist. Although McDonald's currently operates in about
120 countries, many of these are very small. As of 2007, my data on wage rates in
McDonald's restaurants (the McWage) are available for about half of these coun
tries. There are no other sources of wage data with such broad coverage, but there
are several sources that provide more limited opportunities for comparison.
One of the best known sources for international comparisons of wage rates is that
provided by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) for wage rates and compensation
costs in manufacturing. Although the occupations covered are certainly not directly
comparable, these BLS data nevertheless provide a general measure of the level of
wage rates in the broad labor market in several countries. The result of a comparison
of the McWage (converted to US dollars at then-current exchange rates) and the
BLS wage measures (also in US dollars) for 2007 is contained in Figure 4.

In Figure 4 wage rates for each country are expressed relative to the United States.
Thus, the point (1,1) represents the combination of the US McWage and the BLS
wage measure for the United States. The line drawn is a 45 degree line, so that
points above it indicate a relative BLS wage higher than the comparable McWage,
and points below it represent a relative BLS wage that is lower than the comparable
McWage. It is apparent from the figure that these two separate measures of the wage
rate are closely related.

Two additional points are worth noting. First, no matter whether measured by the
BLS data or the McWage, there are many countries that have higher, and in some
cases far higher, wage rates than the United States. Second, in the richer countries
with a high minimum wage (as in Denmark), the McWage tends to be higher than
the BLS measure of the wage. It follows that when minimum wages are binding on
McDonald's restaurant workers considerable care is required in the interpretation of
the McWage.

Figure 5 compares, using the same graphical method, the McWage and the wage
rates for laborers from the available ILO data for 2007. As with the BLS data, it is
apparent that both these measures of the wage rate are highly related. The ILO data
contain more representation from very low-wage countries than the BLS data and
for these the McWage appears, if anything, to be higher than the laborer wage rate.
This may, of course, represent differences in how a laborer's occupation is defined
in the different countries from which the ILO has obtained data.
