In these equations, #(0)=^/ Herfindahl index of country size.
Equations (4) and (5) show the basic free-riding equilibrium for a global public
good with the simplified structure. The globally averaged noncooperative carbon price
and control rate are equal to the Herfindahl index times the cooperative values. For
example, if there are ten equally sized countries, the Herfindahl index is 10 percent, and
the global carbon tax and emissions-control rates are 10 percent of the efficient levels.
The Herfindahl index for country gross domestic products (GDPs) is about 12 percent,
indicating that (when emissions-intensities and damage ratios are equal for
each country) the noncooperative control rate and carbon price are about 12 percent
of the cooperative values. This figure is close to calculations that have been made
in more complete models (see Nordhaus and Yang 1996; Nordhaus 2010; Bosetti et
al. 2012). For example in the multiperiod RICE-2010 model with 12 regions, the
noncooperative price is estimated to be is 1 1 percent of the efficient price (Nordhaus
2010, supplemental materials).
C. Outcomes with Repeated Decisions
A more complete treatment of country interactions in climate-change policy
views interactions in a dynamic framework with decisions over time. The standard
analysis uses the framework of a repeated prisoners' dilemma (RPD) game. For
simplicity, assume that the structure above is repeated every few years with identical
parameters. One equilibrium of a RPD is just the iterated inefficient one-shot equilibrium
with minimal abatement as described above. However, because players can
reward and punish other players for good and bad behavior, RPD games generally
have multiple equilibria; these might include more efficient outcomes if country
discount rates are low (these being the generalized results of various folk theorems).
The efficient RPD equilibrium with large numbers of countries will be hampered by
free-riding and inability to construct renegotiation-proof strategies in situations with
large number of agents.
The strategic significance of the analysis of NC behavior is threefold. First, the
overall level of abatement in the noncooperative equilibrium will be much lower
than in the efficient (cooperative) strategy. A second and less evident point is that
countries will have strong incentives to free-ride by not participating in strong
climate-change agreements. Finally, the difficulty of escaping from a low-level,
noncooperative equilibrium is amplified by the intertemporal trade-off because
the current generation pays for the abatement while future generations are the
beneficiaries of lower damages. But to a first approximation, the noncooperative
analysis in this section describes international climate policy as of 2015.
III. Climate Coalitions and International Environmental Treaties
A. Key Definitions on Sanctions and Coalitions
Might coalitions of countries form cooperative arrangements or treaties that
improve on noncooperative arrangements? Questions involving the formation,
value, and stability of coalitions have a long history in game theory, oligopoly
theory, as well as in environmental economics. In this section, I analyze coalit