conference? Or would it evolve from a small number of countries who see the logic,
define a regime, and then invite other countries to join?
There are no clear answers to these questions. International organizations evolve in
unpredictable ways. Sometimes, it takes repeated failures before a successful model
is developed. The histories of the gold and dollar standards, cholera conventions, the
WTO, the European Union, and the Internet all emphasize the unpredictability in the
development of international regimes (for some histories, see Cooper et al. 1989). The
destination of a Climate Club is clear, but there are many roads that will get there.
V. Modeling Coalition Formation: The Coalition-DICE (C-DICE) Model
A. Description of the Model and Sources
Economic analysis can describe the basic structure of a Climate Club. However
detailed empirical modeling is necessary to determine the effectiveness of differ-
ent regimes in the context of actual emissions, damages, climate change, and trade
structures. For this purpose, I next describe a climate-economic model that exam-
ines coalition formation: the C-DICE model (Coalition DICE, or Coalition Dynamic
Integrated model of Climate and the Economy). It is a static version of the multire-
gional DICE-RICE model (Nordhaus 2010). While the framework is similar to stan-
dard economic integrated assessment models (IAMs), the purpose is different. The
C-DICE model is designed to determine whether or not countries join a coalition
of high-abatement countries, and to find stable coalitions, rather than to look for an
optimal choice of climate policies or map out emissions trajectories.
The current version has 15 regions, including the largest countries and aggre-
gates of the balance of the countries. The regions are the US, EU, China, India,
Russian Federation, Japan, Canada, South Africa, Brazil, Mideast and North Africa,
Eurasia, Latin America, tropical Africa, middle-income Asia, and the ROW (rest
of the world). The model includes exogenous output, baseline C02 emissions, and
a baseline trade matrix for the 15 regions. Countries produce a single composite
commodity, and C02 emissions are a negative externality of production. Regions
can reduce emissions by undertaking costly abatement.
The marginal damages of emissions (social cost of carbon (SCC)) are assumed
to be constant. This is reasonably accurate for small time periods because emissions
are a flow, damages are a function of the stock, and the flow-stock ratio is small. The
fact that the SCC is little affected by abatement levels is shown in Nordhaus (2014,
Table 1), where there is virtually no difference in the SCC between the optimal and
baseline policies.
The damage estimates are drawn from a recent comparison of the social cost of
carbon (Nordhaus 2014). That study found a central estimate for the global SCC of
$24 per ton C02 in 201 1 US$ for 2020 emissions. However, estimates from other
studies range from $10 to as high as $100 per ton C02 for alternative goals and dis-
count rates. I therefore use a range of $12.5-$100 per ton C02 for the global SCC.
Estimates of national SCCs have proven difficult to determine because of sparse
evidence outside high-income regions. Online Appendix Table B-l shows the sub-
stantial differences in national SCCs in three integrated assessment models, the RICE,
FUND, and PAGE models. Note that the conceptual basis of the nati