than to try to create a variable labeled aggregate demand. I've already considered
this issue without mentioning it. The demand function in Figure 2 might be seen as
an aggregate demand function. If so, it's not the function that Keynes had in mind,
because in Chapter 13 of the General Theory, Keynes explicitly rejected the view
embodied in that figure, that the interest rate is the price that balances current purchases
against future purchases.
Keynes was the leader in recognizing the dependence of consumption on current
income, though his view is now considerably altered and improved by the life-cycle
permanent-income model of Friedman and Modigliani.
Keynes's position on wage and price flexibility is hard to figure out from the
General Theory, but the idea that prices and nominal wages are sticky has come to
be a central feature of many models of aggregate fluctuations. In the New Keynesian
model (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans 2005), the slow adjustment
of wages and prices leads to persistent departures from full employment and sensitivity
of output to purely monetary shocks. In the model I have presented here, the
only role?but a central one?for price stickiness is to turn the zero lower bound on
the nominal interest rate into a limitation on the real interest rate. It's not stickiness
of prices that matters, but stickiness of expected price changes.
Outside the macroeconomics profession, Keynes is seen mainly as an advocate
of government purchases to cure slumps. There's essentially no dispute within that
profession that GDP rises and unemployment falls if the government buys more
stuff. But the failure of the government to buy more stuff in 2009, when the need
seemed most intense and the party favoring that policy had firm control of the government,
seems to make government purchases irrelevant to stabilization policy. It's
not that purchases are ineffective but that the government is incapable of executing
a rapid and large increase in purchases.
Keynes's thinking informed and advanced macroeconomics. The analysis of slumps
builds on and advances his ideas and those of his successors. Paul Samuelson's "neoclassical
synthesis" is alive and well in macroeconomics.
XII. Macro Policy
Are there any policy moves available now that would speed up the slow recovery?
Monetary policy has gone to its limit in pushing interest rates down. The
government seems to lack the logistical tools to expand government expenditures
significantly and the political wind is blowing in the wrong direction to push that
lever very hard.
Earlier commentary, starting with Krugman (1998), has suggested that central
banks could overcome the problem of high real interest rates in slumps by raising
expected inflation. One popular proposal is to make the goal of monetary policy
one of keeping the price level on a growth path, rather than stabilizing inflation.
Under this policy, the inflation rate would rise to correct a shortfall in the price level
that developed during a slump. Then every episode of inadequate inflation would
automatically generate expectations of corrective higher inflation and the problem
of excess real interest rate from low inflation would be self-correcting. The Fed has
declined to embrace this formulation of policy. Starting the policy in the conditions
of the beginning of 2011 seems futile, given the lack of any policy tool that seems