fiscal backing may hesitate to undertake such operations out of fear of their balance
sheet consequences.

A simple model of balance sheet dynamics for a central bank with negative net
worth and no fiscal backing appears in my earlier paper, Sims (2005). However, that
paper assumes the central bank has non-interest-bearing liabilities and short-term
treasury bonds as assets. The US Federal Reserve system pays interest on its reserve
liabilities and holds substantial amounts of long-maturity debt. It has been argued
(by me, among others) that the Fed can take contractionary action by raising the rate
paid on reserves, without necessarily selling its assets. But this argument assumes
fiscal backing. Without it, high interest on reserves, while interest on long-maturity
debt remains low, can create negative seignorage, even in the presence of inflation.
In the United States and the euro area today, it is not certain that fiscal repair of
central bank balance sheets would emerge. In the euro area, there is a formal "capi
tal key," specifying in what proportions governments in the EMU should provide
capital when the European Central Bank (ECB) calls for a capital infusion. But if
the capital called for were substantial, and the call came in the wake of ECB policy
actions that were politically unpopular in some countries, the provision of capital
might not be automatic. Perhaps equally important is that, foreseeing the risk of a
capital call and its implicit fiscal transfers, the ECB's governing board might refuse
to authorize market-stabilizing actions by the ECB that an ordinary central bank
would have undertaken.

In the United States, the risk is that the need for capital infusion would most likely
arise in the wake of stringent monetary policy tightening that caused capital losses
on the Fed's long term debt holdings and required an increased stream of inter
est payments on reserves. These actions would be restraining growth and forcing
Congress to confront increased deficits arising from increased interest expense. In
an environment where Congress cannot agree to let the debt limit increase to accom
modate its own spending and revenue legislation, it is not hard to imagine Congress
blaming the Fed for the painful decisions it faces and in the process casting doubt
on its commitment to recapitalize the Fed.

D. Nominal Debt and Real Debt are Very Different

Real sovereign debt promises future payments of something the government may
not have available—gold, under the gold standard, euros for individual country
members of the EMU, and dollars for developing countries that borrow mainly in
foreign currency. Nominal sovereign debt promises only future payments of gov
ernment paper, which is always available. Both types of debt must satisfy the equi
librium condition that the real value of the country's debt is the discounted present
value of future primary surpluses—revenues in excess of expenditures other than
interest payments. But if an adverse fiscal development increases debt, the increased
real debt will require increased future primary surpluses, whereas with nominal debt
there are two other ways to restore balance—inflation, which directly reduces the
real value of future commitments, and changes in the nominal interest rate, which
will change the current market value of long term debt.

Obviously outright default on nominal debt is much less likely than default on real
debt. So long as the country is capable of generating any positive stream of primary