prisoners' dilemma (RPD) games. In RPD games with a large number of agents,
it is difficult to design an incentive-compatible internal sanction against defectors
because the punishments punish the punishers. Like a doomsday device, they are
unattractive, particularly when applied against players who make small contribu-
tions to the public good. Part of the problem is that the penalties are internal to the
game and cannot be linked to some larger set of payoffs. The power of tariffs is that
they are external to the RPD game (i.e., they are part of a different game). Because
participation in the trade system has such large benefits to countries, these benefits
can be used to induce participation in the climate game.
A second critical feature of tariff-sanctions is that they are incentive-compatible.
Many sanctions have the disadvantage that they penalize the penalizer. For example,
if Europe puts sanctions on Russian energy companies, this is likely to raise energy
prices in Europe, hurt European consumers, and therefore have costs on Europe as
well as Russia. Similarly, other sanctions such as a "grim strategy" (which dissolves
the agreement completely if one country violates it) or analogous punishments in
«-person RPD games can only support a cooperative equilibrium for a few coun-
tries (as is discussed in the section on the small coalition paradox). By contrast, the
tariff-sanction mechanism analyzed here (i) imposes costs on the nonparticipating
country but (ii) benefits participants that levy the penalty tariffs. Moreover, because
tariffs apply bilaterally, they can support an efficient equilibrium for global public
goods for a large number of countries as long as the optimal-tariff effect operates.
Figure 1 shows numerically how the tariff-sanction imposes costs and conveys ben-
efits in a manner that aligns sanctions with external effects.
H. Prices or Quantities?
The Climate Club discussed here focuses on carbon prices rather than emissions
reductions as the central organizing principle for an international agreement. While
at an abstract level either approach can be used, a review of both theory and history
suggests that use of prices is a more promising approach.
Quantitative targets in the form of tradable emissions limits have failed in the
case of the Kyoto Protocol, have shown excessive price volatility, lose precious
governmental revenues, and have not lived up to their promise of equalizing prices
in different regions. Moreover, as emphasized by Weitzman (2014), prices serve
as a simpler instrument for international negotiations because they have a single
dimension, whereas emissions reductions have the dimensionality of the number of
regions. To the extent that carbon-price targets lead to carbon taxes, the administra-
tive aspects of taxes are better understood around the world than marketable emis-
sions allowances, and they are less prone to corruption. This discussion is clearly
just a sketch, but it provides some of the reasons for preferring price over quantity
targets as part of an international climate regime. (For an extended discussion of the
relative merits of prices and quantities, see Nordhaus 2013.)
I. How to Get Started?
An important question is, how would a top-down Climate Club get started?
Who would define the regime? Would it begin with a grand Bretton-