somewhat more in the part of consumption covered by the ring prices, but superlative indexes use
weights from both base and comparison countries so that, when these countries are compared
with Britain, the high relative price of air travel?in Cameroon more than 11 times higher than
the average Cameroon to British price ratio?is weighted by the average of the Cameroon and
British share. In consequence, air travel raises the overall (pairwise T?rnqvist) price level by
4.2 percent. With T?rnqvist indexes, this can happen even when the national accounts report no
consumption on the item?see catering services in Zambia in Table 5. The Fisher index is not
defined in this case, but the same general phenomenon occurs, with the budget share from the
comparison rich country powering up the price level of a rarely consumed commodity in the
poor country.

At this point, it is necessary to ask what these indexes are trying to do, why it is a good idea to
match goods so precisely, and why these sharply different budget shares are such a problem. On
the latter, the theorems underlying superlative indexes, that they provide good approximations to
general cost-of-living indexes, require identical homothetic tastes. In that case, the budget shares
would be the same in all countries up to price effects, and the second problem would not occur.
When tastes are identical but not homothetic, the superlative index approximates the cost of liv
ing for a level of living intermediate between the base and the comparison, which, when we are
comparing Cameroon or Zambia with Britain or Japan, is not obviously helpful.
The precise matching of quality is also without clear theoretical foundation, though it cer
tainly provides an answer to the question that it asks, which is what is the average price differ
ence for identical items in the two countries. From a welfare perspective, this may not be the
answer that we want. Consider, for example, an imaginary broad basic heading called "cere
als," among which there is a staple food in all countries, with some countries choosing wheat,
some rice, some maize, and so on. Suppose too, as is broadly true in fact, that the calorie and
nutritive content of a kilo is the same, no matter which cereal we choose. In "wheat" countries,
rice is rare and expensive, and vice versa. To fix ideas, suppose that a kilo of rice is four times
the price of a kilo of wheat in a wheat country. Without weights within the basic heading, the
price of cereals from a geometric mean index will be twice the price of wheat, even though
almost all consumption is of wheat. For welfare purposes, the price of cereals is better repre
sented by the minimum price in the basic heading, not its geometric mean. Such a procedure
might be feasible for foods, where we could plausibly summarize the function of the good by
its calorie content, but for other goods is infeasible for the same reason that quality adjustment
is so hard in general, that without a "simple repackaging" interpretation of quality differ
ences (Franklin Fisher and Karl Shell 1971)?which is what we can do for the wheat and rice
example?there is no noncontroversial way of quality-correcting price differences. Matching
identical goods does not do the job if those goods are used in different ways in different coun
tries, and the problem is intractable without some way of mapping (widely different) goods
into common functionings.

C. Tectonic Regional PPPs

In practice, Table 5 overstates the influence of individual basic headings on the actual PPPs;
pairwise price indexes are not multilateral price indexes, and, beyond that, the ICP uses the ring
prices not country by country, but through equation (3), which averages by region the ratios of
the ring basic heading prices to the within-region basic heading prices, so that high prices in one
country can be offset by low prices elsewhere. Nor does the ring include items that cannot be
priced directly, including rental prices of housing. The ICP office makes available the regional
price indexes for each basic heading, calculated from (3) for ring items, and by various imputa
tions and use of "reference" prices for the other items, so that I can repeat Table 5 for the bilateral