savings rate can have the unintended consequence of reducing the savings of those
who, lacking a default, would have chosen to save more. As one solution to this
problem, and more generally as a way to nudge employees to increase their savings
rates, Shlomo Benartzi and I (Thaler and Benartzi 2004) introduced a plan we called
"Save More Tomorrow." Under this plan, workers are offered the option to increase
their savings rate starting at some later date, ideally when they get their next raise.
Once an employee enrolls in the plan, her savings rate keeps increasing until she
reaches some cap or opts out.
Notice that Save More Tomorrow is just a collection of SIFs. It should not mat-
ter that the savings rate is increased in a few months rather than now, nor that the
increases are linked to pay increases, nor that the default is to stay in the plan, but of
course all these features help. Putting off the increase in saving to the future helps
those who are present biased; linking to increases in pay mitigates loss aversion; and
making staying in the plan the default puts status quo bias to good use. In the first plan
Benartzi and I studied (Thaler and Benartzi 2004), savings rates more than tripled in
three years. In a recent paper (Benartzi and Thaler 2013) we estimated that automatic
escalation (the generic term for Save More Tomorrow, in which savings increases are
not always linked to pay increases) had boosted annual savings by $7.4 billion.
One worry about such programs has been that the increases we observe in retire-
ment savings produced by automatic enrollment and Save More Tomorrow might
be offset by reductions in savings (or increases in borrowing) in other accounts.
However, there was no dataset in the United States that allowed anyone to test this
hypothesis. Fortunately, such data do exist in Denmark, which, because of a history
of having a wealth tax, has long kept good data on household wealth. A recent paper
by Chetty et al. (2014) has made use of these data to answer this question.
The method Chetty et al. (2014) use is to see what happens to savings rates when
an employee moves jobs to an employer with a more generous retirement savings
plan. Using panel data with 41 million person-year observations the authors study
three kinds of savings: employer contributions to tax-sheltered pensions, employee
contributions to those pensions, and employee savings in taxable accounts. Their
research strategy is to study those employees who have been saving a positive
amount on their own and then switch to a firm whose contributions are at least 3
percentage points higher. On average these workers receive an increase in pension
contributions of 5.64 percent of labor income. Do workers contribute less to com-
pensate for this change in their employers generosity? Yes, but just by 0.56 percent-
age points. And saving in taxable accounts is essentially unchanged.
Chetty et al. (2014) also make use of a change in tax policy that occurred
during the period for which they have data. This natural experiment allowed them
to compare the effectiveness of the tax subsidy given to pension contributions in
encouraging retirement savings relative to the effects of design features such as the
employer contribution. The change in the law they exploit was a reduction in the
subsidy given to retirement saving for roughly the top quintile of the income dis-
tribution. Even among this relatively affluent group, the vast majority did not react
at all to the change in the subsidy - they were "passive savers." About 20 percent
of this segment did react and eliminated all their contributions to the tax-sheltered
plans, but they did not spend that money; they just shifted it to taxable savings
vehicles. This leads to a remarkable conclusion. Each $1 of tax expe