It is curious that economists haven't looked more at testimonies of women to
understand the consumption function. Even when, maybe especially when, prices
are rising rapidly, women must have been talking extensively about strategizing
their shopping around their hunches. Apparently then, especially as sex roles were
more strongly divided than they are today, it was men's business to play the stock
market and women's business to manage the shopping, except perhaps around 1929
when women were notoriously getting into the stock market speculation game.23
So, there were attempts again to create a moral imperative against betting on
falling prices, against women's behavior that was analogous to that of the generally
male short sellers on the stock market. The Washington, DC Chamber of
Commerce launched a campaign in 1930 with the slogan "Buy Now for Prosperity."
A "Prosperity Committee" sought the participation of clergymen of all denominations
to "preach prosperity through their pulpits" and thereby to "stimulate production,
relieving the unemployment situation."24
In 1932, the depths of the Depression, a Mrs. Charles E. Foster reportedly told a
women's group
One of the most effective weapons in the hands of American women
today is their tremendous purchasing power. We are told that they spend
eighty-five percent of the incomes of the United States. How could they
better create public opinion in favor of spending as usual than by setting
the example themselves?25
Even as it happened, the contraction was thought of popularly as the product of
some kind of feedback. In his 1933 inaugural address, President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt summed it up with the words "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself,"
describing people as responding with fear to others' fear. This quote is widely
remembered today; his fireside chat has developed into a powerful slow narrative, in
contrast to Hackett's, which does not quite describe an emotion of fear.
Roosevelt also offered moral reasons to spend. Days after his inauguration in
1933, President Roosevelt took the unusual step of addressing the nation on the
radio at a time of a massive national bank run that had necessitated shutting all
the banks down. In this "fireside chat" he explained the banking crisis and asked
people not to continue their demands on banks. He spoke to the nation as a military
commander would speak to his troops before a battle, asking for their courage and
selflessness. Roosevelt asserted, "You people must have faith. You must not be stampeded
by rumors or guesses. Let us unite in banishing fear."26 His personal request
to the nation stuck: it created a narrative to end the bank run. Money flowed into,
not out of, the banks when they were reopened. The narrative of this first fireside
chat is still with us today, and every president starting with President Ronald Reagan
has offered regular chats on the radio on Saturdays, but the narrative has not been
powerful enough, or not used well enough, to prevent rec