those observed by Bauckhage, but over decades, rather than months or years. Some
examples from economists possibly illustrate a compartmental model slow epidemic,
a hump-shaped pattern that plays out over centuries. Adam Smith (1723-1790) has
a Google Ngrams plot that did not peak until the 1880s, and has since been declining
slowly for over a century. Karl Marx (1818-1883) has a Google Ngrams plot that
did not peak until the 1970s.

Taking the Kermack-McKendrick model as an illustration or metaphor, it would
appear that this learning theory might imply that the total impact of an idea is measured
by its Rqc long after the idea has ceased to be infectious. The long-run impact
of an idea then is not testimony to its correctness, but rather to the c/r in the initial
epidemic that popularized it.

In applying the SIR model to social epidemics, we need also consider that narratives
affect the contagion rates of other narratives that are seen to be on the same
topic or that further inform. One new narrative may remind one of another that has
been lying fairly dormant. A wave of similar narrative epidemics can appear.
One must also consider that stories tend to be strategic, fine-tuned by politicians,
advertisers, or other interested parties (Akerlof and Shiller 2015). People with an
aptitude for storytelling see great fortune in monkeying with stories in an effort
to have them go viral. Falk and Tiróle (2016) call them "narrative entrepreneurs."
Glaeser (2005) refers to the "supply of stories," exemplified by hate-creating stories
crafted, produced, fashioned for political advantage. Gino, Norton, and Weber
(2016) describe concoctors of excuses as "motivated Bayesians," meaning that these
people start to believe the fake news that they generated for self-advantage.
Much of the purposeful generation of new stories is for individual profit, but
some of it is done in a patriotic attempt to support confidence and good values. The
process of perfecting stories is one of trial and error, and responsiveness to the kinds
of things that go viral. A successful story entrepreneur may have a lifetime of failed
attempts and perhaps only one or a few breakthroughs. The rare breakthroughs make
the entire enterprise worthwhile.

VI. Narrative Epidemics of Economic Theories

Let us consider as an example the narrative epidemic associated with the Laffer
Curve, a diagram created by economist Arthur Laffer in the theory of public finance.
Let's curve the curve: look at Kermack-McKendrick curves for the narrative of the
Laffer Curve. Looking at the Laffer Curve is an arbitrary choice among a vast number
of narratives, but one that can be searched on databases easily since the name
Laffer Curve appears to connect well to a single narrative with clear economic
impact. This narrative exploded into public attention in 1978 focusing on a 1974
event involving the US economist Art Laffer. In Figure 3, a plot of the frequency
of references to the Laffer Curve by year, from ProQuest News and Newspapers
and by Google Ngrams, somewhat resembles the infectives plot of the KermackMcKendrick
model in Figure 2.

For both, the curves are choppy relative to the model, due to some publication
noise, but show some of the hump shape. For news and newspapers, the frequency
of use of the term Laffer Curve initially rises strongly, from 1977 to 1978, and then
rises rapidly for three more years, peaking in 1981 . Then it falls and continu