here is the calculations made by nations - using their national values, analyses, and
discount rates. Country estimates may differ from those of modelers using uniform
methods and low discount rates. For the central estimates, it is assumed that national
SCCs are proportional to national GDPs. This assumption is primarily for simplicity
and transparency but also because the national estimates are so poorly determined.
However, sensitivity analyses discussed below and in the online Appendix indicate
that alternative estimates lead to identical results on participation.

The abatement costs combine global estimates from the DICE-2013R model

with detailed regional estimates from an engineering model by McKinsey Company
(2009). Abatement costs are largely determined by the carbon-intensity of a region,
which are relatively reliable data. Aside from carbon-intensity, the differences among
regions are largely technological and sectoral as analyzed by McKinsey's study.
One major new feature is to include the effects of international trade and tariffs
on the economic welfare of each region. For both computational and empirical
reasons, the model employs a reduced-form tariff-impact function. This function
represents the impact of changes in the average tariff rate of each country on each
other country. As an example, the model estimates that if the United States imposes
a uniform additional tariff of 1 percent on Chinese imports, US net national income
rises by 0.100 percent and China's net national income falls by 0.018 percent.
Estimates from the optimal-tariff literature indicate that countries have net benefits
if they impose small uniform tariffs on other countries. Similarly, all countries
suffer economic losses if they are the targets of uniform tariffs levied by other countries.
I assume that the tariff function is quadratic with a maximum at the optimal
tariff rates. The numerical parameters of the reduced-form tariff-impact function are
derived from a model developed and provided by Ralph Ossa (2014). Details are
provided in the online Appendix.

Macroeconomic and emissions data are taken from standard sources. GDP and

population are from the World Bank. CO2 emissions are from the Carbon Dioxide
Information Action Center (CDIAC 2014). Note that I include all industrial C02 emissions
but exclude land-use emissions as well as non-C02 greenhouse gas emissions or
other sources of climate change. The interregional trade data are based on data from
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD 2014).

The model considers only one period, centered on 2011. It can be interpreted
as a game with a single long period or as a repeated game with a constant payoff
structure. As discussed above, the purpose is to find an efficient solution to the stage
game that will also be an equilibrium of the repeated game.

Countries are assumed to maximize their perceived national self-interests, and the
welfare of the rest of the world is not counted in their interests. Their estimates may
turn out to be right or wrong, but they are the basis of treaty negotiations. To avoid
stab-in-the-back instability, I assume that there are no side payments among countries.
Treaties are assumed to be stable in the sense of being coalition Nash equilibria,
which means that they are stable as compared to all alternative sub-coalitions.
B. Gains and Losses from Participation

The noncooperative (NC) equilibrium is the starting point in international relations.
Consider the decision of a single country whether to participat
