for the Wall Street Journal. Wanniski wrote the colorful story about Laffer sharing
a steak dinner at the Two Continents in Washington, DC in 1974 with top White
House powers Dick Cheney8 and Donald Rumsfeld,9 as well as Wanniski. Laffer
drew his curve on a napkin at the restaurant table. When news about the "curve
drawn on a napkin" came out, with Wanniski's help, this story surprisingly went
viral, so much so that it is now commemorated. A napkin with the Laffer Curve can
be seen at the National Museum of American History, and a reenactment video of
the restaurant-napkin event depicting Laffer drawing his curve on a napkin is avail-
able on Bloomberg.
Why did this story go viral? It is always hard to explain these things. Laffer
himself said after the Wanniski story exploded that he could not even remember
the event, which had taken place four years earlier.10 But Wanniski was a journalist
who sensed that he had the right elements of a good story. The key idea as Wanniski
presented it, is indeed punchy: at a zero-percent tax rate, the government collects
no revenue. At a 100 percent tax rate the government would also collect no reve-
nue, because people will not work if all of the income is taken. Between the two
extremes, the curve, relating tax revenue to tax rate, must have an inverted U shape.
Now, as Wanniski pointed out with fanfare in the opening line of his 1978 article,
this means that for any feasible tax revenue except one at the very top of the Laffer
Curve, there are two tax rates that will generate this U shape, one at the left with a
high-income level and low tax rates, the other at the right with a low-income level
and high tax rates.
Here is a notion of economic efficiency easy enough for anyone to understand.
Wanniski suggested, without any data, that we are on the inefficient side of the
Laffer Curve. Laffer's genius was in narratives, not data collection. The drawing of
the Laffer Curve seems to suggest that cutting taxes would produce a huge windfall
in national income. To most quantitatively inclined people unfamiliar with econom-
ics, this explanation of economic inefficiency was a striking concept, contagious
enough to go viral, even though economists protested that we are not actually on
the inefficient declining side of the Laffer Curve (Mirowski 1982). It is apparently
impossible to capture why it is doubtful that we are on the inefficient side of the
Laffer Curve in so punchy a manner that it has the ability to stifle the epidemic.
Years later Laffer did refer broadly to the apparent effects of historic tax cuts (Laffer
2004); but in 1978 the narrative dominated. To tell the story really well one must
set the scene at the fancy restaurant, with the powerful Washington people and the
napkin.
Another fad, associated with multiple narratives, appeared around the same time
as the Laffer Curve: "Rubik's Cube." Rubik's Cube was bigger than Laffer Curve on
ProQuest News and Newspapers, but smaller than Laffer Curve on Google Ngrams.
They both show similar hump-shaped paths through time.
The Laffer Curve epidemic was followed during the Reagan presidency (198 1-
1989) by a reduction in the top US federal income tax bracket from 70 perc