To see how this can be done, consider the typical Cobb-Douglas production func
tion of growth accounting, written conveniently as Hall and Jones (1999) do to
isolate total factor productivity (TFP), as

(1)  y i = AtÇKt/Y^1 - °>hh

where, for country or time period i, y¡ is output per worker, K¡ / Y¡ is the capital/output
ratio, h¡ is human capital per worker, Al is TFP, and a is the capital coefficient in the
aggregate production function. Adjusting output per worker by a measure of human
capital and the capital/output ratio then provides a direct measure of TFP. Capital/
output ratios are typically taken as directly measured, and a — is often assumed,
which then leaves the question of how to measure the human capital of the work
force in country or time period i. Various creative approaches to this measurement
issue have been used. Hall and Jones (1999) and Jones and Romer (2010) assume
that h can be represented by a Mincer-style earnings function and use estimated
returns to schooling to construct measures of h¡. Hendricks (2002) assumes that the
wage of observationally equivalent workers who migrate from country i to work
in the United States, compared to the wage of workers from the United States who
work in the United States, provides a measure of differences in h¡.

Assuming workers are paid their marginal products implies that it is also pos
sible to use the wage rates of workers doing identical jobs in different countries or
at different times to account for human capital differences. A worker with the base
skill level h0i will be paid w0i, which, because marginal products are proportional
to average products in a Cobb-Douglas production function, will be proportional to
A¡ (KjYj)"''11 ~ a'h0i. Since hm = h00 (for all Í) for workers using the same skills, it
follows that the wage rate of the base-level skilled worker (w0i) in country i can be
expressed, relative to the wage rate of the base level skilled worker in a base country
(w00), using (1) as

(2) wjww = [AiiKi/Y^1 - a)]/A0 (.K0/Y0)a7(1 " a).

According to (2), if workers are paid their marginal products, wage ratios of the base
skill group can be accounted for by differences in capital/output ratios and differ
ences in total factor productivity. Differences in human capital per worker will not
affect this wage ratio because the workers being compared are using the same skills.
Alternatively, equation (2) also implies that adjusting relative wages for differences
in capital/output ratios will provide a measure of relative total factor productivity
(A;/A0). Of course, if the wage structure is distorted by minimum wages or monop
oly or monopsony in product or factor markets, the assumption that h0i is the same
in each country will fail. Thus, assumptions about competitive markets are critical
for using wage rates to measure TFP.
