Some New Simulation Results:  In the rest of this lecture, I present new simulation
results aimed at assessing how much policy space the new monetary tools could
provide prospectively. Like the papers described immediately above, I employ sto-
chastic simulations of FRB/US to compare expected economic performance under
alternative monetary policy frameworks, given historically realistic patterns of
shocks. So as to consider cases in which the lower bound is an important constraint,
I assume that the real and nominal neutral interest rates remain historically low.
Specifically, letting   r   ∗   be the real neutral rate, I consider the cases   r   ∗   = 1 and   r   ∗   = 0,
which bracket some standard estimates (Williams 2018). Unless otherwise stated, I
will also assume that the central bank’s inflation target is 2 percent and that  long-run
inflation expectations are anchored at that level. If   i   ∗   is the nominal neutral interest
rate, then the two cases considered correspond to   i   ∗   = 3 and   i   ∗   = 2. We know from
Kiley and Roberts (2017) that   i   ∗   = 3 is sufficiently low as to lead, under traditional
monetary policies, to frequent encounters with the lower bound. However, it is pos-
sible of course that the nominal neutral rate is, or will become, lower even than my
assumed case of   i   ∗   = 2. I return to this possibility below.
The alternative policies to be evaluated are listed in the leftmost panels of Tables
3 and 4. Briefly, the policies considered are as follows.
Baseline Rules.—The traditional policy approach, taken here as the baseline, is
represented by variants of the standard Taylor (1993) rule. I assume the “balanced
approach” version of the rule, which gives greater relative weight to unemploy-
ment than Taylor’s original formulation (Yellen 2017). I assume also that the rule
is inertial, that is, the policy rate depends in part on the lagged policy rate, with a
coefficient of 0.85 in quarterly data. I report results for the central case in which the
central bank’s inflation target equals 2 percent (  π   ∗   = 2) but also for alternative infla-
tion targets (  π   ∗   = 4 and   π   ∗   = 5). Higher inflation targets are assumed here to result
in  one-for-one increases in the nominal neutral rate, thereby affording more policy
space. Also reported are results for the case, labeled “unconstrained” in the tables, in
which   π   ∗   = 2 but the constraint imposed by the zero lower bound on the  short-term
rate is ignored. Comparing the unconstrained case to other policy rules measures the
costs imposed by the lower bound.
Threshold Forward Guidance.—As in Chung et al. (2019) and Bernanke, Kiley,
and Roberts (2019), I consider variants of forward guidance in which, once the
short-term rate is constrained by the lower bound, the central bank promises to
hold the policy rate at zero until inflation has reached a specified level.20 Once that
threshold is reached, policy reverts to the baseline Taylor rule. I report results for
three alternative inflation thresholds: 1.75, 2.0, and 2.25 percent. I also considered
thresholds based on the unemployment rate (not reported), with results that were
qualitatively similar to the policies using inflation thresholds.
In some standard models, the implied effects of forward guidance on the economy
are implausibly large, the  so-called forward guidance puzzle (Del Negro, Giannoni,
and Patterson 2012; McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson 2016). The  puzzle appears
20 Specifically, inflation is defined as the  four-quarter percent change in the core PCE price index.