but is hard at work for two additional hours in the evening. Even the self-employed
may have nonlinear earnings because they cannot fully delegate responsibility.
Gender differences in earnings across occupations and occupational groups substantially
concern job flexibility and continuity. By job flexibility I mean a multitude
of temporal matters including the number of hours, precise times, predictability and
ability to schedule one's own hours.
I will now provide some micro-foundations for the notion that nonlinear pay
with respect to hours worked is responsible for the majority of the residual differences
observed in earnings by gender. These notions are the micro-foundations
underlying the compensating differentials model of pay with respect to the amenity
"job-flexibility."
In many workplaces employees meet with clients and accumulate knowledge
about them. If an employee is unavailable and communicating the information
to another employee is costly, the value of the individual to the firm will decline.
Equivalently, employees often gain from interacting with each other in meetings
or through random exchanges. If an employee is not around that individual will be
excluded from the information conveyed during these interactions and has lower
value unless the information can be fully transferred in a low cost manner.
The point is quite simple. Whenever an employee does not have a perfect substitute
nonlinearities can arise.26 When there are perfect substitutes for particular workers
and zero transactions costs, there is never a premium in earnings with respect to
the number or the timing of hours. If there were perfect substitutes earnings would
be linear with respect to hours. But if there are transactions costs that render workers
imperfect substitutes for each other, there will be penalties from low hours depending
on the value to the firm. A sparse framework will demonstrate these points and
develop them further.
B. Framework to Understand the Nonlinear ( Convex ) Hours-Wages Relationship
Assume that each employee, i, invests in training (e.g., MBA, MD) only prior
to the job and that the training is valuable in a hierarchy of positions, j. The positions
can be separate occupations or they can be different varieties of the same
occupation. Let 0 < A < 1 be the fraction of full-time employment worked by the
employee or some metric concerning which hours are worked. Output, Q, for an
employee is given by
m o = i X'kj if Xi > Aj*
I 'kj • (1 - Sj) if a,. < a; '
where k} is output per unit time when time exceeds some amount, Sj is the reduction
in output because the employee works less than some amount in occup