Figure 1. Price and Net Asset Value for CUBA Fund
Note: On December 18, 2014, President Obama announced he was going to lift several restrictions against Cuba.
Source: Bloomberg
only to fall back to the long-term trend. Because of the various forms of leverage
involved, this rise and fall in prices helped create the global Great Recession.
The difference between the CUBA example and these much larger bubbles is that
it is impossible to prove that prices in the latter were ever wrong. There is no clear
smoking gun. But it certainly feels like asset prices can diverge significantly from
fundamental value. Perhaps we should adopt the definition of market efficiency pro-
posed by Fischer Black (1986) in his presidential address to the American Finance
Association, which had the intriguing one word title "Noise." Black (1986, p. 553)
says "we might define an efficient market as one in which price is within a factor of
two of value, i.e., the price is more than half of value and less than twice value. The
factor of two is arbitrary, of course. Intuitively, though, it seems reasonable to me,
in light of sources of uncertainty about value and the strength of the forces tending
to cause price to return to value. By this definition, I think almost all markets are
efficient almost all the time. 'Almost all' means at least 90 percent."
One can quibble over various aspects of Black's definition but it seems about
right to me, and had Black lived to see the tech bubble of the 90s he might have
revised his number up to three. I would like to make two points about this. The first
is that the efficient market hypothesis has been a highly useful, indeed essential
concept in the history of research on financial markets. In fact, without the EMH
there would have been no benchmark with which to compare anomalous findings.
The only danger created by the concept of the EMH is if people, especially poli-
cymakers, consider it to be true. If policymakers think that bubbles are impossible,
then they may fail to take appropriate steps to dampen them. For example, I think it
would have been appropriate to raise mortgage-lending requirements in cities where
price to rental ratios seemed most frothy. Instead, this was a period in which lending
requirements were unusually 