His analysis emphasizes credible or "self-enforcing" treaties (Barrett 1994). These
are ones that combine individual rationality (for each player individually) and collective
rationality (for all players together). This concept is weaker than the concept
of coalition stability discussed later, which adds rationality for each subset of the
players. Barrett emphasizes the difficulties of reaching agreements on global public
goods with large numbers of participants because of free-riding. Similar to the results
for cartels, Barrett and others find that stable climate coalitions tend to have few
members; therefore, as the number of countries rises, the fraction of global emissions
covered by the agreement declines. He further argues, based on a comprehensive
review of existing treaties, that there are very few treaties for global public goods that
succeed in inducing countries to increase their investments significantly above the
noncooperative levels. Moreover, the ones that do succeed include external penalties.
How can we understand the small coalition paradox? Here is the intuition for
climate change: clearly, two countries can improve their welfare by combining and
raising their carbon price to the level that equals the sum of their SCCs. Either country
is worse off by dropping out. The 2014 agreement between China and the United
States to join forces in climate policy might be interpreted as an example of a small
bottom-up coalition.
Does it follow that, by increasing the number of countries in the treaty, this process
would accumulate into a grand coalition of all countries with efficient abatement? That
conclusion is generally wrong. The problem arises because, as more countries join, the
cooperative carbon price becomes ever higher, and ever further from the NC price. The
discrepancy gives incentives for individual countries to defect. When a country defects
from an agreement with m countries, the remainder coalition (of m - 1 countries)
would reoptimize its levels of abatement. The revised levels of abatement would still
be well above the NC levels for the remainder coalition, while the defector free-rides
on the abatement of the remainder coalition. The exact size of the coalitions would
depend upon the cost and damage structure as well as the number of countries.
The online Appendix provides a simple analysis of the bottom-up coalition equilibrium
for identical countries with the cost and damage structure shown in equations
(l)-(5). The only stable coalitions have two or three countries. (For simplicity,
assume the lower number holds in the case of ties.) The size of the stable coalition is
independent of the number of countries, the social cost of carbon, output, emissions,
and the emissions intensity. If there are ten identical countries, there will be five
coalitions of two countries each. The global average carbon price is twice that of the
NC equilibrium. This result is clear because each country-pair has a joint SCC that
is the sum of the two countries' SCCs. The globally averaged carbon price will be
one-fifth of the efficient level. With countries of different sizes but equal intensities,
countries will group together in stable coalitions of size two, with the countries of
similar sizes grouped together in pairs (i.e., largest with second-largest, and so on).
The key result is that bottom-up coalitions perform only slightly better than the
noncooperative equilibrium.
C. Modeling Results for Bottom-up Coalitions
The coalition theories described above generally use highly stylized structures
and assumptions, so it is useful to examine empirical models of climatecoalitions