holdings in savings accounts and the like and borrowing from credit cards and other
unsecured forms. In the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), households

illiquid by this standard earned 58 percent of all income. The fraction of households
that were constrained?74 percent?is even higher because lower-income

households are more likely to be constrained. Nonetheless, many quite prosperous
families hold essentially no liquid financial assets. Their recourses in times of unexpected
income losses include borrowing against unencumbered houses and cars,

selling these assets, liquidating retirement accounts, and seeking help from friends
and family. Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston (2008) find a rather
smaller response of consumption to transitory income than is implied by the SCF
data, suggesting that the other recourses may be important.

I incorporate these facts into the model by dividing consumption into two parts.
Consumption of unconstrained households obeys the standard life-cycle model, while
consumption of constrained households is their earnings less their payments on outstanding
credit. The payments are forced saving. To determine the amount of the

required payments, I use the following logic: Let Dt be the outstanding debt of constrained
households in quarter t. Constrained households always borrow the maximum

allowed, so their debt is controlled by the borrowing limits imposed by lenders.
The borrowing interest rate is rD. The sources of funds for constrained households are
income yt and increased borrowing, Dt ? Dt_x. Uses of funds are consumption ct and
payment of interest on earlier debt, rDt_xDt_x. Thus consumption is

(1) ct = yt + Dt - (1 + rDj_x)Dt_x.

I let

(2) st = rDj_xDt_x - ADthe

net burden on consumption relative to income associated with debt service. The
level of debt is high enough that interest payments usually exceed new borrowing,
so Dt is usually positive. In a stationary setting, Dt = D, a constant, debt repayments
are zero, and household purchases of consumption goods are less than income by
the amount of interest they pay, rDD.

Figure 5 shows the burden st, as a fraction of GDP, calculated from Flow of Funds
data on consumer debt and National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) data on
household interest payments. Prior to 2007, the burden was close to zero?new borrowing
came close to covering interest payments. Tightening of credit began even

before the onset of recession at the end of 2007 and continued to the end of 2010.
In a full-employment economy containing unconstrained and constrained households,
the tightening of credit as shown in Figure 5 would not have contributed to a
slump. Rather, the interest rate would clear the output market, thanks to the absence
of any lower bound on the interest rate. When constrained households cut back consumption
spending, including purchases of new houses and consumer durables, low

rates would induce unconstrained households to consume more by borrowing, thus
offsetting the saving of constrained households.

Atif Mian and Amir Sufi (2010b) demonstrate large differences among states in
the US in durables purchases negatively correlated with indebtedness.
