H. The Kyoto Protocol as a Failed Regime
One test of the approach used here is to examine the stability of the Kyoto Protocol.
This agreement included at the outset a substantial fraction of global emissions and
would, if it had broadened and deepened, have made a substantial contribution to
slowing the growth of emissions. However, it failed to gain new adherents, and some
of the members with binding commitments, particularly the US, dropped out.
Conceptually, the Kyoto Protocol was a climate club with no sanctions. To test
its coalition stability, I formed an initial club with only the original Annex I Kyoto
Protocol countries having binding emissions commitments with no penalties for
noncompliance (0 percent tariff). Starting with the original Kyoto coalition status, I
tested for coalition stability as described above.
All of the simulations collapsed to the noncooperative equilibrium. (See
Figure B-5 in the online Appendix for the simulations.) This might not be surprising
in light of the analysis above. However, recall that the analytical models
assume much more environmental and economic homogeneity than is seen in reality.
Perhaps some combination of damages, abatement costs, and carbon intensities
might lead to limited cooperation. However, for the modeling structure used here,
the Kyoto Protocol could not survive.
So the conclusion from this simple test is that the Kyoto Protocol was doomed
from the start. It did not contain sufficient economic glue to hold a cooperative coalition
together.
I. Regional Choice among Regimes
The present analysis focuses on the design of a Climate Club and the extent to
which different club designs succeed in inducing efficient participation and abatement.
In reality, treaties do not spring full-grown but emerge from a complicated diplomatic
process. The key steps are negotiation, ratification, implementation, and renegotiation.
The present study focuses on negotiation and assumes that once treaties are negotiated,
they are ratified and implemented (so there are no "cheap talk" negotiations).
Negotiations take place in two parts. The first stage is treaty design, while the second
is the decision whether to participate. For the Kyoto Protocol, the United States was
deeply involved in treaty design but did not ratify the treaty. The last section explains
the US nonparticipation and the eventual collapse of the Kyoto Protocol as the failure
to design a treaty that would lead to widespread participation and renewal.
Turn next to the issue of treaty design. Suppose that climate negotiations consider
the different Climate Club regimes analyzed above. Which of the possible regimes
would be chosen? Consider these questions for a single case where the global SCC
is $25 per ton C02 and where the penalty tariff rate is 5 percent. Individual countries
have their own SCCs (say that the US SCC is $4 and India's is $2), as well as their
national abatement cost functions. If countries are just scaled-up or scaled-down
replicas, all would prefer a $25 per ton target carbon price. In reality, countries
differ, so their preferred target prices will differ. Countries with high damages will
prefer a high target carbon price because they will benefit from higher global abatement;
countries with high abatement costs will prefer a low target price because that
will reduce their abatement costs. The analog for health clubs is that