this respect he is like a combination of court and police or jailer. Formal law, where enforcement
is provided by governmental or quasi-governmental bodies, is also third-party governance, but
not for profit.
Honesty of these third parties is not automatic. Formal courts may also be biased or corrupt,
and the police and jailers may likewise be corrupt in enforcing the judgment of the courts.
Private for-profit enforcement brings the problem out into the open. If Peppe conspires with
the other trader to double-cross one of his customers, the customer has little recourse. Peppe's
honesty must be a part of the condition of equilibrium of the system. Governance works by con?
verting a one-shot prisoner's dilemma game of the two traders into two repeated games of each
with the third party. To sustain honest behavior in each game, each trader and Peppe both need a
sufficiently large share in the total pie. This places upper and lower bounds on the fee of the third
party: Peppe's fee has to be high enough to keep him honest, but low enough to keep the trader
honest (Dixit 2004, chap. 4; further details in Dixit 2003a).
A simple special case of the analysis will illustrate the point. Consider a one-shot game with
the payoff matrix

where W>H>C>0>L, and 0 is the outside option. This game is a prisoner's dilemma; it
is worth playing even without governance, but can yield a higher payoff if governance ensures
honesty. Suppose both parties engage a Peppe, who charges each of them a fee F each period for
his services. Consider separately the cases of information and enforcement services.
Under the information service, each customer can cheat to get a one-time payoff W-F instead
of H - F for an extra benefit (W - H), but then the game will collapse into the cheating equilib?
rium, so the player will get C instead of H - F forever. If r is the discount rate, the condition for
this deviation to be undesirable is
{H-F)-C> r(W-H), or F < (H - C) - r (W - H).
Peppe can double-cross one of the customers to let the other gain W instead of H, and can extract
at most this excess (W - H) for this. But then the cheated customer will not deal with Peppe in
the future, so Peppe will lose F forever. The condition to keep Peppe honest is therefore
F>r'{W-H\
where r' is Peppe's discount rate (which may be higher than r, to reflect the probability of loss of
business or death in the cutthroat competition to become the next Peppe). These two inequalities
are the conditions on the division of surplus, or the two-sided efficiency wage. If
r' (W - H) < (H - C) - r (W - H\
we can find an F satisfying both inequalities.