Does the smaller gender gap result mainly from the characteristics of the technology
occupations or from the features of the industries of the technology employeesThe
answer is that it results far more from the occupation than from the industry. To
examine whether industry is the locus of greater gender equality rather than occupation
I create a variable measuring the fraction of the industry's workforce in one of
the identified technology occupations.
To see whether the industry of the technology workers matters, a log earnings
regression is estimated similar to the previous ones but is limited to individuals in
one of the technology occupations. I add a variable measuring the fraction of the
industry workforce in technology (see online Appendix Table A2). Some industries,
such as "computer systems design," have a large fraction of their workers in technology
occupations (around 60 percent) whereas others, such as "motor vehicle manufacturing,
" are moderate (around 12 percent) and still others are very low. Engineers
and information technology workers are hired in almost all industries. The technology
industry variable is also interacted with female.
The results are that technology workers in industries with more technology
workers earn considerably more than workers in other industries, even with occupation
fixed effects. But women do not earn disproportionately more than men
within the technology industries. The bottom line is that technology occupations
and not technology industries more generally are associated with greater gender
equality in earnings.23
III. A Personnel Economics Theory of Occupational Pay Differences
A. Micro-foundations of Compensating Differentials
Residual differences by occupation in earnings by gender, I will demonstrate, are
largely due to the value placed on the hours and job continuity of workers, including
the self-employed.24 Individuals in some occupations work 70 hours a week and
receive far more than twice the earnings of those who work 35 hours a week. But
in other occupations they do not. Some occupations exhibit linearity with respect to
time worked whereas others exhibit nonlinearity (convexity).25 When earnings are
linear with respect to time worked the gender gap is low; when there is nonlinearity
the gender gap is higher.
Total hours worked are generally a good metric for time on the job. But often what
counts are the particular hours worked. The employee who is around when others are
as well may be rewarded more than the employee who leaves at 1 1 am