usual. Some of the critiques were aimed at the empirical methods used in these
early papers, namely hypothetical survey questions such as problems 1 and 2 above.
Economists have never been very impressed by such data because the subjects have
nothing on the line. Furthermore, typically these questions were just asked once,
so many argued that they were not a good indication of what people would do in
real-life situations in which they had an opportunity to learn from prior mistakes. So
the critique was two-fold. First, if you raise the stakes people will take the questions
more seriously and choose in a manner more consistent with optimization. Second,
if given a chance to learn, people will get it right. Often the same person would make
both of these critiques, thinking that they reinforced one another.

Of course there is no doubt that the ability to practice improves performance in
most tasks. No one plays well in his first game of chess, or billiards for that matter.
And most people eventually become at least competent at highly complex tasks such
as riding a bike or running down a flight of stairs. Similarly, the notion that people
will pay more attention when the stakes go up is intuitively appealing. Certainly we
pay more attention when buying a car than when deciding what to order for lunch.
But rather than these two arguments working together, they actually go in opposite
directions. The reason this is so is that, as a rule, the higher the stakes, the less often
we get to do something.

Consider the following list of economic activities: deciding how much milk to
buy at the grocery store, choosing a sweater, buying a car, buying a home, selecting
a career, choosing a spouse, saving for retirement. Most households have mastered
the art of milk inventory management through trial and error. Buy too much and it
spoils, buy too little and you have to make an extra trip to the convenience store.
But if households do this (say) twice a week, eventually they figure it out, at least
until the children move out of the house or switch to beer. Few of us buy cars often
enough to get very good at it, and the really big decisions like careers, marriages,
and retirement saving give very little room for learning. So critics can't have it both
ways. Either the real world is mostly high stakes or it offers myriad opportunities to
learn - not both.

Even in domains where there are multiple opportunities to learn, people may not
make the best of those situations. Daniel Kahneman and I ran an experiment years
ago that illustrates this point. (We never published the results so the details will be
sketchy.) Subjects were given forms that looked something like this:

Heads: 1 2345 ... 18 19 20

Tails: 1 2345 ... 18 1920

They were then shown two large manila envelopes that were labeled Heads and
Tails and were shown that each envelope contained 20 poker chips numbered from
1 to 20. The experimenter said he would first flip a coin and then, depending on the
outcome, choose a poker chip from the respective envelope. Subjects were allowed
to circle five numbers on their form, dividing their choices as they wished between
the heads and tails rows. When the experimenter selected a chip and announced the
result, for example "Heads, 17" any subject who had circled the winning coin face
and number would win some money. Specifically, if the chip came from the Heads