A. From Commodity to Token to Fiat Money
Appendix B describes a 700-year process of theorizing and experimenting that transformed
a European commodity money system with many nominal anchors?mint-melt price pairs (i.e.,
gold or silver points) for full-bodied coins of all denominations?to a one nominal anchor system
 that retained gold points for only one standard full-bodied coin and used government-issued
convertible token coins and notes for other denominations.23 After another 100 years, governments
 abolished the gold points for the standard coin, too, leaving the nominal anchor to be the
monetary authorities' knowledge of the quantity theory of money and their good intentions.
Appendix B notes how commodity money concealed the quantity theory of money by making
the price level be a low variance exogenous variable and the money supply be a low variance
endogenous variable. I see a self-confirming equilibrium working here. Eventually, some atypical
 policy experiments generated data with sufficient variance in price levels and money supplies
to reveal the quantity theory to empiricists, a theory that led to Ricardo's proposal and ultimately
induced monetary experts like Keynes to advocate a well-managed fiat system.
B. Two Threats to a Well-Managed Fiat Money System
Friedman (1992,249-52) claimed that our fiat money system is historically unprecedented and
repeated the warning of Irving Fisher (1926, 131) that "Irredeemable paper money has almost
invariably proved a curse to the country employing it" because two obstacles obstruct the path
to managing a fiat currency well: (i) political pressures to use fiat money to finance government
expenditures, and (ii) temptations to exploit a Phillips curve (Friedman 1992, 207). Learning
models have been used to interpret monetary authorities' struggles to understand and avoid these
obstacles. Marcet and Nicolini (2003) and Sargent, Williams, and Tao Zha (2006a) constructed
adaptive models that focus on Friedman's obstacle (i) and feature private agents' learning. Those
papers both select among rational equilibria and modify their outcomes enough to fit data from
big inflations in Latin America. In the remainder of this paper, I focus on statistical models that
feature monetary authorities' struggles with Friedman's obstacle (ii).
VI. Learning Inflation-Unemployment Dynamics
This section describes three stories about how the US monetary authorities learned about inflation-
unemployment dynamics after World War II. These stories assume that a monetary authority
 can control inflation if it wants.24 Then why did the US monetary authority allow inflation to
rise in the late 1960s and 1970s, and why did it bring inflation down in the 1980s and 1990s? If
we assume that its purposes did not change, and that it always disliked inflation and unemployment,
 then it is natural to focus on changes over time in the monetary authority's understanding
of inflation-unemployment dynamics. I describe three stories associated with empirical models
that feature either temporary or permanent discrepancies between a government's model and a
true data-generating mechanism.25