for where I see the most exciting possibilities for progress: more and better models;
and a sustained effort to move the entire topic of wage setting into the hands of
(labor) economists.

A. Models

There are two main approaches to modeling the factors that generate

upward-sloping supply curves: search frictions (which Manning 2021 calls the
“new monopsony”) and idiosyncratic preferences for jobs (which Manning calls the
“new classical monopsony”). Both approaches have some strengths and some weaknesses.
The search approach directly addresses turnover, which is a key feature of

labor markets and appears to be the main mechanism for  between-firm competition.
Models with on-the-job search also create a job ladder, which is a very useful construct
for understanding the costs of job displacement and the effects of recessions
(e.g., Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos 2013; Moscarini and  Postel-Vinay 2018).
But the lack of information presumed in a typical posted wage search model is
troubling. There is plenty of evidence that most workers know about at least some
higher-paying jobs. (Everyone at Berkeley knows that salaries are higher at Stanford,
for instance). Firms’ positions on the wage ladder are relatively stable, so it seems
possible to learn about opportunities through referrals (Caldwell and Harmon 2019)
or other channels. And if the number of potential employers for a typical worker is
a low as recent research suggests, it’s hard to imagine that workers aren’t aware of
many of the relevant opportunities.

Models based on idiosyncratic preferences, on the other hand, ignore imperfect
information but assume that most people simply don’t want another job, even if it
pays more. On the positive side, these models build directly on established frameworks
from IO and trade: the accumulated experience in those fields will be very

helpful, particularly in addressing strategic interactions between wage setters (as
in Berger, Herkenhoff, and Mongey 2021). On the negative side, there is no job
ladder or any particular cost of losing the current job: everyone is employed at their
best option, given the wage and  nonwage amenities offered by different employers.
Employers are starving for workers, but are nonetheless setting wages below
marginal revenue products to capture some of the surplus from inframarginal workers.
Such a framework seems unlikely to yield helpful insights about recessions or
depressed local labor markets.

Manning (2021) suggests that one way to combine some of the strengths from

both approaches is to assume that workers have idiosyncratic preferences over current
job openings, and that—as in directed search models—one of the attributes of
an opening is the size of the application pool. This seems like a promising direction.
Another idea is to assume more complicated  task-based production functions
for firms that lead to minimum skill standards—so many jobs are “off limits” for
most workers, even within a given observed skill group (e.g., Haanwinckel 2020;
Huckfeldt 2022). This might be a way to incorporate the cyclical upgrading process
discussed by Reder (1955) and Okun (1973).

A related modeling issue is how to incorporate strategic interactions in wage setting.
We know that firms spend a lot of resources monitoring wages of other employers
through specialized  sector-specific surveys. We also know th
