chances in the larger, later marketplace.24 Other employers choose not to interview
at the meetings, but to wait and perhaps hire some talented individual who
“fell through the cracks” amidst the crowded interview schedules. So the meetings provide some services to the broader market, but the strategy sets of participants are large, and they can choose to do without those services, and not participate in that marketplace.
25
Finally, note that some marketplaces in a larger market may be repugnant, in the
sense that although they are attractive to some participants, others not only don’t wish to participate themselves but think that such marketplaces should not operate at all (Roth 2007). This kind of repugnance can occur even in the absence of easily measurable negative externalities to those who would like to eliminate such a marketplace
(Ambuehl, Niederle, and Roth 2015). The kidney transplant marketplaces
I’ll discuss later have been fundamentally shaped by the repugnance, enshrined in law, toward buying and selling organs.
26 But until recently I would have been hard
pressed to name a part of the market for economists that was viewed as repugnant by other economists. Lately, however, the website Economics Job Market Rumors (EJMR
27) has achieved that distinction.
The site started as an anonymous internet discussion board focused on the job
market, with threads devoted to particular candidates, schools, subfields of econom-ics, etc., including anonymously sourced rumors about which schools were interviewing,
flying out, and offering jobs to which junior candidates. Over time it also featured discussions of other aspects of academic economics, and discussions of any-thing else someone wished to discuss. As has happened with many other anonymous and pseudonymous internet sites, the tone of the discussion sharply deteriorated, and many of the posts became attacks on particular individuals, often in misogynistic, homophobic, anti-Semitic, or racist language.
28 The matter became widely known
among economists after an undergraduate thesis, Wu (2017), which cataloged the
prevalence of misogynistic language and critical comments about individual women on the site, was discussed in a NY Times column.
29 (As of this writing it appears that