Although the agency friction model has most often been applied to businesses,
it is even more apt for consumers. Larger businesses escape the agency friction by
sidestepping intermediaries and selling securities directly to providers of capital.
Consumers borrow only from intermediaries, with the small exception of borrowing
from family and friends.
Following the logic of the agency friction model, I consider a variable interpreted
as a wedge between returns earned by savers and the cost of capital to businesses
and households. The wedge is equivalent to a property tax on business capital and
household durables, including houses. Increases in the wedge are potent sources of
lower output and higher unemployment.
As a result of the real-estate crash, many financial intermediaries suffered severe
depletion of their equity in long positions in real-estate-related assets. Measuring
the resulting increase in frictions is a challenge. While it is easy to measure spreads
for traded instruments, those spreads are not infected by the wedge suggested by
the agency theory. The spread between BAA corporate bonds and Treasurys of the
same maturity widened stunningly in late 2008 but the difference did not reflect profit
accruing to any intermediary. Spreads of that type came back to normal way too fast to
account for any of the persistence of the slump. These spreads may arise from transitory
 segmentation of asset markets?sudden loss of equity among one class of investors
 results in price declines for the assets they sell. Quickly, other classes of investors
develop the expertise to recognize the undervaluation of the assets and bid their prices
back to the normal level relative to safe Treasurys.
Intermediation spreads are potentially instructive about frictions. One important
challenge is to distinguish the part of a spread that arises from the probability of
default from the part that is a true friction. The ideal measure of the spread for bank
loans would be the lending rate for new loans, less the best forecast of risk-adjusted
default losses and less the bank's borrowing rate. The difficulty is determining
the forward-looking expected loss from default. Under the assumption that banks
stabilize expected default losses for new loans, so that the default component is a
constant, it is informative to study the total spread between lending and borrowing
rates. Figure 6 shows the spread based on data from the Federal Reserve Board for
business loans of $1 million or more. The spread is the loan rate reported by banks
(not necessarily limited to new loans) less the federal funds rate as a measure of
the borrowing rate. The spread rose by almost two percentage points and remained
persistently high. I conclude that the evidence mildly supports the view that spreads
of the type associated with frictions rose and remained high during the slump. I note
that the spread remains persistently high at the same time that spreads for traded
securities have returned to normal.
Figure 6 shows one measure of friction with respect to business investment, the
spread between the rates that businesses pay and the rate that banks pay to fund
loans, the fed funds rate. It widened dramatically after the crisis and was still widening
 even in 2010.
Figure 7 shows the spreads between the rate reported by the Federal Reserve Board
for credit-card borrowing and the federal funds rate. There is just a hint of a decline at
the end, but the spread definitely remained high for most of the slump to date.
The most important component of household credit is residential mortgages.
Figure 8 shows the spread between the rate reported by the Federal Reserve Board