These markets have low transaction costs, high stakes, lots of competition (except
perhaps in some banking sectors) and crucially, the ability to sell short. It is short
selling that allows for the possibility that even if most investors are fools, the activities
of "smart money" arbitrageurs can assure that markets behave "as if' everyone
were smart. This is the intellectual underpinning of the efficient market hypothesis
(EMH).
The efficient market hypothesis really has two distinct components. The first,
what I call the "no free lunch" provision, is that it is not possible to "beat the market"
on a properly risk-adjusted basis. There is an enormous literature devoted to testing
this hypothesis, with many arguments on each side. The difficulty in evaluating
competing claims is in agreeing on the way to account for risk. For example, there is
widespread agreement in the literature that a strategy of buying "value stocks," for
example those with low ratios of price to earnings or book value, earns higher returns
than buying "growth stocks," which have high price-earnings ratios. However, there
is a debate about the explanation for these excess returns. Behavioralists (for example
De Bondt and Thaler 1985, 1987; Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1994) argue
that the excess returns reflect mispricing of some sort. On the other side, efficient
market advocates such as Fama and French (1993) argue that the high returns to
value stocks occur because those stocks are risky. Although it would not be right to
say that this argument has been settled to everyone's satisfaction, I do think that no
one has been able to identify a specific way in which value stocks are riskier than
growth stocks. (For example, value stocks tend to have lower betas, the traditional
measure of risk in the Capital Asset Pricing Model.) Still, while academics debate
about the correct interpretation of these empirical results, one important fact first
documented in Jensen's (1968) PhD thesis remains true: the active mutual fund
industry on average does not beat the market.
So from the point of view of an investor, this aspect of the efficient market hypothesis
can safely be considered to be at least approximately true. Nevertheless, it is
important not to misinterpret this finding. The lack of predictability in stock market
returns does not imply that stock market prices are "correct." This is the second
aspect of the EMH, what I call the "price is right" component. The inference that
unpredictability implies rational prices is what Shiller (1984, p. 459) once called
"one of the most remarkable errors in the history of economic thought." It is an error
because just as the path of a toddler running around on a playground might be completely
unpredictable, the path is also not likely to be the result of maximizing some
well-formed objective function (other than having fun).
The price is right component of the EMH is, in my opinion, by far the more
important of the two ingredients of the theory. It is important because if prices are
"wrong" then capital markets are not doing an efficient job of allocating resources.6
The problem has been to come up with a convincing test of this part of the theory
because the intrinsic value of a security is normally unknowable. If the price of
Apple Inc. were too high or too low, how would we know? It turns out that there are
classes of assets for which we can say something definitive, namely those for which
we can use the law of one price as a test. Although we don't know the rati