The 0*Net characteristic levels were then weighted by the relative number of individuals
in the 0*Net occupations to get the characteristic values for the Census

occupations, for which the residual gender gaps had been computed.

As can be seen in Table 2, technology and science occupations score far below
the others on each of the five measures and in some cases the differences are almost
one standard deviation lower. That is to say, in comparison with business occupations
those in technology and science have far greater time flexibility, fewer client
and worker contacts, fewer working relationships with others, more independence
in determining tasks, and more specific projects with less discretion over them. Each
of these characteristics should produce a more linear relationship between hours
and earnings and the greater linearity should produce a lower residual difference in
earnings by sex.

The characteristics help differentiate the business from the technology and science
occupations rather well. They do not always capture differences between the
health professions and others. For one, they do not capture the time demands among
the self-employed and many in the higher paid health occupations (e.g., dentist,
podiatrist, physician, and veterinarian) have substantial rates of ownership. But they
do pick up the fact that most health professionals have considerable contact with
clients, have enormous discretion, and make decisions affecting the lives of others.33
Within the "other" category, lawyers are clearly at the high end of the characteristics
with considerable contact, time pressure, structure, and discretion.

The scatter plot of the simple mean of the 0*Net characteristics for each of the
95 high-income occupations against the mean (adjusted) gender earning gap for
each occupation among college graduates (full-time, year-round workers) is given
in Figure 5. The relationship is clearly negative with a correlation coefficient of
-0.463. A higher value for the characteristics is associated with a lower ratio of
(adjusted) female to male earnings (a larger negative value for the log of the gender
gap). In addition, the characteristics also pick up some of the within group variance.
The relationship is strongest for time pressure, contact with others, and freedom to
make decisions, but is also reasonable for establishing and maintaining interpersonal
relationships and structured versus unstructured work.

V. Evidence on Nonlinear Pay and the Gender Gap in Earnings

I have thus far established that the gender gap in pay is small at the start of
employment but greatly increases with age (even correcting for hours and weeks in
a national sample) and that it significantly differs by occupation. I have also shown
using the 0*Net data that characteristics of work settings are associated with the
(adjusted) gender gap in pay such that work environments that require more interactions
or have more time pressure, for example, are those with larger gender earning
gaps.

Another hint at what must be in the last chapter can be gleaned by adding a
(log hours X occupation) interaction to the regression containing the
