procedure by itself is credible: see again Anand and Segal (2008) for a discussion of how little
we know. For my purposes here, I note that inequality between countries has dominated the total
in recent history (see Francois Bourguignon and Christian Morrison 1998), and within country
inequality is not affected by the choice of PPPs?at least if we ignore regional price differences
within countries?and so is not my topic here. The graphs in Figure 1 are falling over time in
large part because the per capita national incomes of the world's largest countries, India and
China, have been growing very rapidly and moving from the bottom of the world income distri  bution towards its middle.
The top two graphs in the figure show the two time-series using World Bank PPP data before
and after the 2005 revision of the ICP The bottom two graphs use data from the Penn World Table
(PWT) and compare version 5.6, which used PPPs referenced on 1985, with version 6.2, which
uses PPPs referenced on 1993. This second pair of graphs is chosen to illustrate the 1993 revi
sion to the ICP, which is the one immediately prior to the latest 2005 revision. The Penn World
Table uses a different type of PPP than does the data from the World Bank, Geary-Khamis rather
than EKS?which tends to understate the level of global inequality because of Gershenkron or
substitution bias; see for example Steve Dowrick and Muhammad Akmal (2005). PWT also uses
different rules for updating between benchmark years and exercises more freedom than does
the World Bank in editing growth rates from country national data, e.g., from China; there are
no published World Bank data on a 1985 basis. In consequence, the 1993 inequality numbers
from the PWT are not identical to the World Bank estimates, but for my purposes, they are close
enough and follow a similar trend. The main point to note is that the revision from 1985 to 1993,
like the later revision from 1993 to 2005, moved measured inequality upwards. In fact, the revi
sions are about the same on both occasions, about 5 percentage points to the Gini coefficient;
using Anthony Atkinson's (2003) useful metric, a substantive (as opposed to statistical) offset
ting decrease in the Gini coefficient could be accomplished by each country's contributing five
percent of its per capita GDP into a common pool which is then equally distributed among all
countries, a proposal that dwarfs even the most ambitious programs for international aid.
The World Development Indicators did not provide data on aggregate household consump
tion in international dollars prior to 2008, so it is not possible to replicate Figure 1 for per capita