of 6 percent - the largest value they could justify was 0.35 percent. As a result of
this calibration exercise a long and interesting literature ensued.
Although such examples of predictions about magnitude are uncommon, eco-
nomic theory does make some rather precise predictions about effect sizes, namely
for variables that should have no effect at all on behavior. For example the following
things should not matter: the framing of a problem, the order in which options are
displayed, the salience of one option over another, the presence of a prior sunk cost
(or gain), whether the customer at a restaurant can see the dessert options when
choosing whether to stick to the planned diet, and so forth. I call these, and a mul-
titude of other possible variables that can and do influence choices, "supposedly
irrelevant factors" or SIFs. One of the most important ways in which behavioral eco-
nomics can enrich economic analyses is by pointing out the SIFs that matter most.
One domain in which the potential importance of SIFs has been best documented
is retirement saving. In a standard life-cycle model Econs compute their optimal
consumption path and then implement a plan of saving, investing, and eventually
dis-saving that maximizes lifetime utility, fully incorporating proper actuarial prob-
abilities of mortality, rates for husband and wife as well as risks of divorce, illness,
and so forth. This is a problem that makes playing world-class chess seem easy.
Chess has neither uncertainty nor self-control problems to muck up the works. So
it should not be surprising that many Humans have trouble dealing with retirement
saving in a defined-contribution world in which they have to make all the decisions
themselves. However, it has been possible to help people with this daunting task
with the aid of some SIFs.
The first SIF that has been important in helping people to save for retirement is
the intelligent use of the default option. In a world of Econs, especially when the
stakes are as high as they are for retirement saving, it should not matter whether
someone gets signed up for the plan unless he opts out or is excluded from the
plan unless he opts in. The cost of ticking a box and filling out a form must be tiny
compared to the benefits of receiving a company match and tax-free accumulations
for decades. Nevertheless, changing the default has had an enormous impact on the
utilization rates of 401(k) plans.
The first paper to document this effect was Madrian and Shea (2001) using data
from a company that had adopted what is now called "automatic enrollment" in
1999. Previously, to join the 401(k) plan employees had to fill in some forms, and
if they failed to do so, they were not enrolled. Madrian and Shea compared the
enrollment rates for new employees in 1998 under the old "opt in" regime to those in
1999 where employees had to opt out if they did not want to join. Before automatic
enrollment, only 49 percent of employees joined the plan within their first year of
employment; after the switch to automatic enrollment, 86 percent of the employees
were enrolled in their first year. Supposedly irrelevant indeed! By now automatic
enrollment is widespread. More than half of large US employers are using the con-
cept and the United Kingdom is in the process of rolling out a national defined con-
tribution savings plan with this feature. Most plans, including the national UK plan,
find that opt out rates are around 10 percent.
One problem with automatic enrollment is that many plans initially enroll
employees at a low savings rate; in the United States it is often just 3 percent of pay.
As Madrian and Shea pointed out in their initial paper, such a low ini