an  estimate of the overall supply elasticity. Manning’s insight provides a tractable
method of estimating labor supply elasticities that has been implemented in many
different settings.
Perhaps the most compelling evidence based on this approach comes from the
experiment on public sector hiring conducted by Dal Bo, Finan, and Rossi (2013).
These authors randomly varied the salaries announced at different job sites to poten-
tial job applicants for a position in the office of the Regional Development Program
in Mexico. Taking account of the combined impact of higher wages on application
rates and on the probability of accepting a job, they calculate that the elasticity of
recruiting with respect to wages is around 2.1 (though rather imprecisely estimated).
Using Manning’s shortcut, the implied (steady state) elasticity of labor supply is
around 4.2.11 In a simple monopsonistic model such an elasticity implies that wages
are marked down relative to marginal revenue products by about 20 percent.
Observational studies of the partial correlation between wages and quit or recruit-
ing rates tend to yield elasticities in the same range (see Sokolova and Sorensen,
2021 for a  meta-analysis of this literature and Ashenfelter et al. forthcoming for
an overview of a studies published in a recent issue of the Journal of Human
Resources). For example, Bassier, Dube, and Naidu (2021) study job ending rates
of workers using administrative data from the State of Oregon, and estimate elastic-
ities in the range of −1 to −2.5, with a preferred point estimate of −2.1, implying
a steady state labor supply elasticity of 4.2. Azar, Berry, and Marinescu (2019) use
data from a large online job posting service to study the application choices of job
searchers. Adopting the estimation approach of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004)
(and using instrumental variables for posted wages) they infer that the  firm-specific
elasticity of applications with respect to wages is around 2.9. Assuming the recruit-
ing elasticity is the same as the application elasticity this implies a steady state labor
supply elasticity of just under six.
B. The Relationship between Wages and Firm Productivity
In a competitive labor market, more and less productive firms pay the same
wages for workers, even if the more productive firms are larger. In imperfectly com-
petitive labor markets, however, more productive firms will generally have to pay
more to maintain a larger workforce. Card et al. (2018) developed a simple partial
equilibrium model where workers have MNL preferences over different firms and
firms set wages without accounting for strategic interaction effects (i.e., a model of
monopsonistic competition). They then calibrated the model to (roughly) match the
observed degree of  pass-through from  value added per worker to wages. In the exist-
ing literature researchers typically find that wages are about 0.5 to 1.5 percent higher
at firms with 10 percent higher productivity. In the parameterization of preferences
adopted by Card et al., this degree of  pass-through is consistent with  firm-specific
supply elasticities of about four.
Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setlzer (2022) present a more extensive analysis
of the  pass-through of  firm-specific and  market-wide value added p