in the current context. One is adaptation or the use of relative standards, so that people in rich
countries might report outcomes that are much the same as people who are objectively much
worse off. This is a serious concern, but it is subject to empirical enquiry, at least in part. The
second concern is practical, how and by whom such data might be collected. There currently
exist a number of potentially usable international datasets that collect data on various aspects
of wellbeing, such as the Eurobarometer, or the World Values Survey. But neither of these has
global coverage, and the global data in the World Values Survey is not available every year,
nor does it always use nationally representative samples. These deficiencies have been recently
addressed by the Gallup organization, which has been running the Gallup World Poll annually
since 2006.

The World Poll (WP) aims to collect uniform data every year from a random sample of all
of the people of the world. To this end, the WP has posed the same set of questions to ran
domly selected national samples of adults from 154 countries; in most cases, the sample sizes
are around 1,000 individuals, with a few larger and a few smaller. Not all countries are surveyed
in every year; there were 130 in 2006, 101 in 2007, 125 in 2008, and 72 (with data processed
at the time of writing) in 2009. There are 87 countries that were present in all of the first three
years and 50 (so far) in all four. Several of the questions address individual wellbeing, and those
that I examine here are as follows: (a) the "ladder" question, which asks people to imagine a
ladder whose bottom rung, 0, represents the worst possible life for you, and whose top rung, 10,
represents the best possible life for you, and to report on which rung they stand at the present
time; (b) Have there been times in the past twelve months when you did not have enough money
to buy food that you or your family needed? (yes/no); (c) Which one of these phrases comes
closest to your own feelings about your household's income these days? Living comfortably on
present income, Getting by on present income, Finding it difficult on present income, or Finding
it very difficult on present income; (d) Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with your standard of liv
ing, all of the things that you can buy and do? The WP also has a single income question, but it
is frequently missing, and not too much weight should be placed on the nonmissing values, so,
rather than calculate poverty lines, I work with the questions directly. It should be noted that the
fact that the questions are identical in all countries does not imply that they are not interpreted
differently in different countries.

In Deaton (2008), I used the 2006 data to show that there was a close, and approximately
linear, relationship between the national average value of the ladder and the logarithm of per
capita GDP in international dollars, and Betsy Stevenson and Justin Wolfers (2008) subsequently
showed that the relationship also holds within countries using the WP income data. These stud
ies show that it is not true that there is (complete) cross-national adaptation of ladder scores;
poorer countries, and poorer people, have lower ladder scores so that, for example, the range of
national average scores extends from 8.0, 7.8, and 8.0 in Denmark from 2006 to 2008, to 2.8 in
Togo, 3.0 in Sierra Leone, and 3.2 in Zimbabwe, all in 2008. The Danish mean is almost three
standard deviations above each of these three African means. The relationship between average
ladder and the logarithm of per capita GDP in the 2006 data is also present in the 2007 and 2008
rounds. A lack of (at least complete) adaptation also characterizes the other measures. Figure 5
shows a scatter plot of the log of per capita GDP against the fraction of respondents who reported
that they were dissatisfied with their standard of living; the lightly-shaded circles are for 2006,
the darker circles for 2007, and the darkest circles are for 2008. Table 7 shows the correlations
with the log of per capita GDP and the various measures in each year for which they are available
and, in the bottom panel, the correlations between growth of per capita GDP and the changes in  the measures.
All of the self-reported measures are strongly correlated with log income in levels, which dem
onstrates that there is either no adaptation or that adaptation is sufficiently limited so that these