One way in which it becomes apparent that this kind of marketplace for doctors,
and indeed the whole market for doctors, is part of a much larger labor market is
in the changing demographics of the medical labor force. In the 1950s, almost all graduates of American medical schools were men, and today the graduates are quite equally divided between women and men. One consequence of that change has been a steadily increasing number of couples graduating from medical school together and seeking two jobs, not one. A clearinghouse in which each individual submitted a rank order list meant to represent his or her individual preferences didn’t work for couples.
55 But in the presence of couples who submit preference lists ranking pairs
of positions, stable matches are not guaranteed to always exist (Roth 1984).
It was thus apparent to me, when I agreed in 1995 to direct a redesign of the resident
match, that market design was going to require answers to different questions than had so far been asked. Instead of being satisfied with theorems indicating that stable matchings always exist in simple matching problems, but might sometimes fail to exist when couples (or other instances of complementary preferences) were present, it was going to be important to know, for example, how often stable match-ings might fail to exist when couples are in the market.
56 The algorithm we designed
to meet the changing needs of the medical match (Roth and Peranson 1999) allowed us to show empirically not only that the set of stable matches was small, but also that it was virtually never empty. As is often the case in market design, this empir -
ical observation, which enabled the Roth-Peranson algorithm to be implemented with confidence (albeit with a check of the final stability of the outcome), preceded and eventually inspired the theoretical work that has begun to explain why stable matchings involving couples can be found in large markets (see Kojima, Pathak, and Roth 2013, and Ashlagi, Braverman, and Hassidim 2014). Today dozens of medical and healthcare marketplaces use centralized clearinghouses that employ the Roth-Peranson algorithm, and there are a number of clearinghouses that do not deal with couples and use other variants of the deferred acceptance algorithm.