effect is typically not pronounced. In effect, although their patterns of demand are different,
international comparisons of poor households give much the same result as international com
parisons of middle income households.

III. Poverty Lines and Poverty Counts

Most of the increase in the world poverty count with the revision in the ICP can be attributed
to two main factors only one of which, the treatment of housing rental, is directly attributable
to the ICP itself. Much more important was an increase in the global poverty line. Although
the procedure that the Bank used to calculate the global line is the same as previously, the line
itself has been increased. Both of the factors are of general interest. The treatment of housing
is a major concern for virtually all price index work and will be so for future rounds of the ICP.
The procedure for calculating the global poverty line will also determine the future path of the
global count, and in particular how the global line changes as countries get richer. I deal with  each issue in turn.
A. Actual and Imputed Rent for Housing

Housing rental, including imputed rental for owner occupiers, is a difficult ("comparison resis
tant") area for the ICP; see Deaton and Heston (2010). For the African and Asian regions, the
2005 ICP had to fall back on an imputation. Because the ICP is primarily focused on obtaining
"volume" measures of GDP in international currency, it was decided to impute rental by assum
ing that, for countries in Asia and Africa, the volume of rental was a fixed proportion of GDP.
This is a neutral imputation because, unlike other possibilities, it does not disturb the ratios of
GDP across countries. However, what is neutral for quantities is not neutral for prices. The parity
for the rental basic heading is derived as the ratio of expenditures on rental (which comes from
each country's national accounts) divided by the assumed quantity, which is taken by the imputa
tion to be proportional to GDP. For countries that make little or no allowance for owner-occupier
rentals in their national accounts, this "imputed" parity will be very low. Table 2 shows the parity
for housing rentals relative to the overall parity for consumption for the 15 poor countries whose
national poverty lines in international currency are averaged to give the $1.25 global poverty
line. I also show India and China for comparison; we do not know that these are correct, but it
is reasonable for a non-tradable stock like housing to be cheaper than the average consumption  item in those countries.
Several of the rental parities in the 15 countries in Table 2 are too low to be credible. For
Ghana, the rental parity is less than five percent of the overall parity; it is 11 percent in Gambia,
and 12 percent in Tajikistan. In nine of the 15 countries, the rental parity is less than a half of the
overall parity. If we are concerned with the parities and the overall PPP for consumption, rather
than with volumes, a neutral assumption would have been one in which the parity for rental was
taken to be the same as an average over all consumption, and this can be accomplished by drop
ping the category and recalculating the PPPs. This raises the PPPs (local currency to US dollars)
in Africa and Asia, and more precisely raises the PPPs relative to India of countries in Table 2
whose rental parities are less than 0.602, and relative to China of those whose rental parities are
less than 0.832. The Indian or Chinese equivalent of the local poverty lines of those countries is
reduced by an increase in their PPPs, which reduces the headcount rates in India and China and,
because they are so large, reduces the global poverty count. This (alternative) neutral treatment
of housing rental reduces the 2005 poverty count by more than 100 million people.
It should be noted that the treatment of housing is not an error in the ICP, which is focused on
producing reasonable estimates of GDP rather than prices or poverty, but it turns into a problem