Various forms of these departures have been found necessary in a number of modern
dynamic general-equilibrium macro models. In this section, I investigate whether
any simpler specifications, closer to standard economic principles, might deliver
reasonable accounts of the facts about persistent slumps.
One possibility is to drop property (3), sticky real wages, in favor of normal equilibrium
in a competitive labor market without search frictions. In the model, this
alternative corresponds to setting the parameter rp9 the elasticity of employment with
respect to the marginal product of labor, to zero. In effect, the model with these two
modifications is a real business cycle model, which determines the real interest rate.
Forcing the interest rate upward by imposing the zero lower bound places the model
out of equilibrium. A standard solution to this problem is to drop labor-market equilibrium
and require intertemporal equilibrium in the output market, which amounts
to assuming a sticky real wage?it generates an implicit flat labor supply relation.
Another possibility is to drop properties (1) and (2), and instead to take the output
market to be perfectly competitive and always in equilibrium. The simplest version
of the model assumes that labor supply is perfectly elastic at a fixed real wage.
Robert Shimer (2010) takes this approach. The resulting model generates persistent
slumps if some force causes a reduction in the full-employment marginal product of
labor. A fall in productivity would have that effect. Because productivity rose at only
slightly below normal rates during the contraction phase of the slump, explanations
of the slump based on declining productivity are not plausible.
Shimer proposes a fall in the business capital stock as a driving force. Because
that event drives down the full-employment marginal product of labor, the loss
of capital causes an immediate contraction. The level of employment falls by the
same proportion as the capital stock, thus restoring the marginal product of labor
to the level of the rigid real wage. A slump ensues until capital accumulation and