Two facts strike an economist looking into kidney transplantation for the first
time. There is a dramatic shortage of organs compared to the need. And it is against
the law almost everywhere in the world to pay a living kidney donor, or the family of a deceased donor, for a donation. By law, kidneys must be gifts, offered at a price of zero.
Becker and Elías (2007) argue that repealing the laws against paying donors
could solve the organ shortage, and estimate that the market clearing price would be low. Held et al. (2016) estimate that the amount that the American healthcare system would save from each additional transplant and could therefore afford to pay for a kidney donation would be much higher than needed to end the kidney shortage, because transplantation is both much cheaper and more beneficial than the alterna-tive treatment of dialysis. These papers are part of a large literature arguing for or against compensation for donors, not only of organs for transplant, but of other parts related to the body, like blood and blood plasma, sperm and eggs, surrogacy, etc.
100
However, only one country in the world, Iran, has a market in which living kidney donors can legally be paid.
101 Everywhere else, it is illegal to compensate donors,
although there are active black markets. So buying and selling kidneys is a repug-nant transaction in the sense I described earlier.
Kidney exchange is a way to increase the number of organs available for trans-
plant without paying donors. Sometimes a person is healthy enough to donate a kid-ney, and would like to donate to a loved one but cannot, because not every kidney is compatible with every patient. In the past, a patient with a willing but incompatible living donor would have to continue to wait for a deceased donor, but the idea of kidney exchange is that two incompatible patient-donor pairs could exchange kid-neys, so that each patient would receive a compatible kidney from the other patient’s donor. This was first suggested by a surgeon who studied transplant incompatibil-ity (Rapoport 1986), who proposed that an international registry of incompatible
patient-donor pairs be established to facilitate kidney exchange. The first kidney exchanges were not performed until the 1990s, and interestingly the first kidney exchange in Europe was between two pairs of different nationalities: Swiss and German. When the surgeries were reported in Theil et al. (2001), some German critics compared it to organ trafficking, and indeed repugnance almost completely prevents kidney exchange in Germany up to the present time.
102 For the early his-
tory of kidney exchange, see Wallis et al. (20