remainder of this paper, I focus on yet another application, namely, to situations in which a government
 solves an intelligent design problem using a misspecified model.
D. REE or SCESome
 builders of adaptive models have specified an approximating model to equal a true one,
meaning that there exists a value 0O for which/(jx, vx | p) = /(j00, v?? 10O) for all plans v00, not just
equilibrium ones. This specification prevails in adaptive models in which least squares learning
schemes converge to rational expectations equilibria (see Woodford 1990; Marcet and Sargent
1989b). When/(j00, vx | p) ^f(yx, vx 10O) for some choices of v, the most that can be hoped for is
convergence to an SCE.22
E. SCE-REE Gaps and Policy Design
Why is a gap between a rational expectations equilibrium and a self-confirming equilibrium
important for a macroeconomist? Macroeconomists build models with many small agents and
some large agents called governments. It doesn't matter to a small agent that his views may be
incorrect views off an equilibrium path. But it can matter very much when a large agent like a
government has incorrect views off an equilibrium path because in solving a Ramsey problem,
a government contemplates the consequences of off-equilibrium path experiments. Wrong views
about off-equilibrium path events shape government policy and the equilibrium path.
To illustrate these ideas, I sample some historical events that central bankers have learned
from. Section V summarizes hundreds of years of monetary theories and experiments that took
us to the threshold of the twentieth century experiment with fiat currency. Section VI jumps
ahead to the 1960s and 1970s and uses statistical models to describe how the US monetary
authorities struggled to understand inflation-unemployment dynamics as they sought to meet
their dual mandate of promoting high output growth and low inflation.
V. Learning Monetary Policy before and after Ricardo
Central bankers are preoccupied with nominal anchors. For centuries, commodity monies
built in redundant nominal anchors. When Ricardo wrote, new technologies of coin production
and expert opinion had established the confidence to dispense with redundant nominal anchors
and to rely on a unique anchor taking the form of melt-mint points for a single standard commodity
 coin. In the twentieth century, monetary authorities implemented Ricardo's recommendation
to banish precious metals from the monetary system and sought an alternative monetary anchor
based on a theory of fiat money and the public's faith in the wisdom and good intentions of the
monetary authorities.