Figure 4. A Theory of Occupational Pay Differences

Notes: Each of the lines gives the relationship between output, Q, in some occupation and the  time input, A, of a worker where 0 < A < Amax. When the time input is reduced below some  level, A*, output decreases discretely for occupations 1 and 2. Occupation r has a linear rela-  tionship between time worked and earnings throughout. An individual who works between X'  and Amax will be in occupation 1, an individual between '' and A ' will work in 2 and all others  will work in r, if they remain in the labor force.
setup given by (1) contains a discontinuity in productivity if the worker is absent
more than some amount.

Several occupations or positions may exist among which individual i can choose.
To begin with, assume two positions exist such that kx > k2 and that output is
reduced when hours do not exceed some level such that ¿1 > S2. In addition, assume
fct(l - <5|) < k2( 1 - S2 ) so that one occupation or work setting does not dominate
the other. Now add a third position, r, characterized by linearity (Sr = 0) for which
kr < k2. That position, which can be called the reservation occupation, will dominate
the other two when A is sufficiently low. Also assume that k2( 1 - ô2) < kr .
As shown in Figure 4, an employee will work in occupation 1 as long as A > Aj
and will then shift to occupation 2 at lower hours and finally to the reservation occupation
when A < A2. The relationship between output and hours, and thus between

earnings and hours, is nonlinear (convex). On a per unit time basis the employee
receives more in occupation 1 than 2 and more in occupation 2 than in the reservation
occupation, r.

In the framework, the position with the highest slope is also the one with the
highest penalty with regard to reduced hours. Rather than stay in that position, an
employee who wants lower hours will shift to one that has a lower penalty but
also a lower slope. If the level of hours that the worker wants is yet lower, then the
worker will take the reservation job, which involves complete linearity with respect
to
