such as the construction of databases such as the Penn World Table, which underpins almost all
of economists' empirical understanding of the process of economic growth, as well as for the
measurement of global income inequality, which is another of my main concerns.
One goal of this paper is to understand why almost half a billion people were moved into pov
erty at the time of the revision of the purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates in the 2005
round of the International Comparison Project (ICP). This same revision also increased global
income inequality, widening the apparent distance between poor and rich countries. I shall argue
that the increase in poverty had little to do with the ICP, and much to do with an inappropriate
increase in the global poverty line. The causes of the increase in inequality are harder to pin
point, but my investigations lead to skepticism about our ability to make precise comparisons
of living standards between widely different countries such as poor countries in Africa and rich
countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
In spite of the attention that they receive, global poverty and inequality measures are arguably
of limited interest. Within nations, the procedures for calculating poverty are routinely debated
by the public, the press, legislators, academics, and expert committees, and this democratic dis
cussion legitimizes the use of the counts in support of programs of transfers and redistribu
tion. Between nations where there is no supranational authority, poverty counts have no direct
redistributive role, and there is little democratic debate by citizens, with discussion largely left
to international organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank, and to nongovern
mental organizations that focus on international poverty. These organizations regularly use the
global counts as arguments for foreign aid and for their own activities, and the data have often
been effective in mobilizing giving for poverty alleviation. They may also influence the global
strategy of the World Bank, emphasizing some regions or countries at the expense of others. It is
less clear that the counts have any direct relevance for those included in them, given that national
policymaking and the country operations of the World Bank depend on local, not global, poverty
measures. Global poverty and global inequality measures have a central place in a cosmopolitan
vision of the world, in which international organizations such as the UN and the World Bank
are somehow supposed to fulfill the redistributive role of the missing global government; see for
example Thomas Pogge (2002) or Peter Singer (2002). For those who do not accept the cosmo
politan vision as morally compelling or descriptively accurate, such measures are less relevant:
John Rawls (1999), Thomas Nagel (2005), Leif Wenar (2006).

The paper is organized as follows. Section I explains how the dollar a day poverty numbers are
calculated and how they depend on purchasing power parity exchange rates. It shows that poverty  measures are sensitive to the PPPs used in their construction and establishes the basic facts and
puzzles to be addressed, particularly the increases in poverty and inequality associated with the
latest ICP revision. Section II is somewhat more technical and can be skipped without losing the
thread of the main argument. It discusses the components of the construction of PPPs that are
particularly important for measuring world poverty and inequality, as well as how PPP indexes
need to be reweighted for use in poverty measurement. It argues, by reference to my related work
with Olivier Dupriez (2009), that the re weighting, although a clear conceptual improvement,
matters less than might be thought. Section III returns to the main argument and is concerned
with the definition of the global poverty line: I discuss ways of constructing the line based on the
international price indexes and the national poverty lines of poor countries. As is always the case
with poverty lines, how the poverty line is updated with respect to new information deserves as
much or more attention than how its original value is set. I argue that the updating procedure
in current use is incorrect, that it can result in reductions in national poverty causing increases
in global poverty, and that this explains why the global poverty counts increased so much in
the latest revision. Paradoxically, one of the main reasons that India (and the rest of the world)
became poorer was because India had grown less poor. I argue for a definition of the line, and an