The macro storyline in the Great Depression gradually morphed into a national
revulsion against the excesses and pathological confidence of the Roaring Twenties.
Other narratives focused on the rising leftist or Communist movement that was
seen as potentially influencing future government policy far beyond the National
Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), the New Deal institution to support fair prices.
The NIRA was perceived as only one example of the interference with business that
might come eventually.
The worst days of the Great Depression, in 1932 and 1933, were haunted by
scary narratives coming from Europe and Asia. Japan had just occupied Manchuria
in 1931. In the Soviet Union in 1932-1933, The Holodomor, the ethnic-Ukrainian
version of the Holocaust, was raging in the form of a man-made famine - Stalin's
attempt to stifle dissent, which cost millions of lives. These narratives, with hind-
sight sounding like some of the worst narratives of World War II to come, were
widely circulated in the West. In January 1933, Hitler seized power in Germany and
quickly began murdering his political opponents and terrorizing Jews.
These narratives were good reasons for anxiety that might encourage many to
cancel their plans for frivolous spending, such as a larger house or a new car, in order
to feel they had sufficient savings. Some of these events also brought moral reasons
not to spend. There were many boycotts: against German and Japanese goods as
well as against goods associated with Jewish people. Germans began boycotting
Western goods. These actions must have had some economic effect.
Frederick Allen's 1931 book, Only Yesterday, seemed to get closer to understand-
ing the real cause of the Great Depression, in terms of the stories of the time, and
the book has motivated my thinking ever since I first read it. The book may seem
superficial in a sense: just a collection of stories with no organizing theme except in
the afterword. However, through understanding all those stories of fads and crazes,
one gets a view of what was happening in the 1920s. One reviewer of Allen's book
in 1931 explained what he learned from the book: "Of course, we change fads. That
is the essence of our changelessness - that we plunge from one craze to another with
kaleidoscopic ease."27
Contagion rates for stories of business failures, rather than inspirational stories,
were naturally high at a time when a large fraction of the population were unem-
ployed. Stories abounded of business people committing suicide.28
It seemed to most people in the late depression that there was an inevitable trend
toward government control of business. A May 1939 poll asked, "Do you think that
ten years from now there will be more government control of business than there is
now or less government control of business?" Fifty-six percent of the respondents
said more; 22 percent less; 8 percent neither; 14 percent had no opinion (Higgs
1997).
By the 1930s, the theory that Communist forces in America were massing forces
into an inevitable future direction for America was a story everyone knew, whether
they liked it or not. The increasing radicalization of President Roosevelt plays 