The concept of "governance" has risen from obscurity to buzzword status in just three decades.
EconLit shows only 5 mentions of the word governance in the 1970s; by the end of 2008, it was
mentioned 33,177 times. The much more specific phrase "economic governance" has appeared
192 times;1 its more popular cousin, "corporate governance," 9,717 times. My focus is on economic
governance, but I also examine its relation to corporate governance.
As with any buzzword, everyone understands the concept a little differently. This is unavoidable,
so I will just give my definition for the purpose of this article, and leave it at that. By economic
governance I mean the structure and functioning of the legal and social institutions that
support economic activity and economic transactions by protecting property rights, enforcing
contracts, and taking collective action to provide physical and organizational infrastructure.
Economic governance is important because markets, and economic activity and transactions
more generally, cannot function well in its absence. Good governance is needed to secure three
essential prerequisites of market economies:
(1) Security of property rights: Without this, individuals will lack the incentives to save and
invest, because they will fear that others will deprive them of the fruits of these activities. They
will also forgo capital market trades to achieve efficient allocation of assets, because they will
fear for the principal and not just the return on the capital they invest in others' enterprises. And
Erica Field (2007) finds that security of capital improves the productive use of labor, as people
no longer have to spend their time and effort guarding their property.
(2) Enforcement of contracts: Economic transactions promise gains to all voluntary participants.
But each party may lose if the other fails to fulfill its promised role in the transaction,
but instead acts opportunistically. Fear of such counterparty cheating may prevent people from
entering into the contracts, and mutual gains will go unrealized. Formally, this is a bad equilibrium
in a prisoner's dilemma.
(3) Collective action: Much private economic activity depends on an adequate provision of
public goods and the control of public "bads." In this I include not just physical but also institutional
and organizational infrastructure. Provision of social safety nets, facilitation of internal
ization of externalities, and the control of public bads, for example management of common pool