The clear finding is that the occupations grouped as Business have the largest negative
coefficients and that occupations grouped as Technology and Science have the
smallest ones. That is, given age and time worked residual differences for Business
occupations are large and residual differences in Technology and Science are small.
In fact, for the "young" group (less than 45 years old) some Technology and Science
occupations have positive coefficients.20

For the full-time, full-year sample including log hours, log weeks, and education
in years (in addition to the basic set of variables), the residual difference for
the Business occupations is -0.240 and the residual difference for the Technology
and Science occupations combined is -0.1 14. For the sample of college graduates,
the differences are -0.227 for Business and -0.102 for Science and Technology.
Residual differences for the Health and Other groups are heterogeneous.21 -
These residual differences by occupation provide another important clue about
what must be in the last chapter for there to be gender equality. If one can isolate
the features of occupations that have high and low residual differences by gender
one can figure out what factors make for more equal pay. But before I explore the
reasons for these differences I must address the possibility that the coefficients for
some of the occupations, in particular the "technology" occupations in which there
are relatively few women, are largely driven by selection. My answer will be that
selection is not the dominant reason for the small penalty to being a woman working
in the technology and science fields.

Potential Biases: Technology Occupations. - The fact that individuals in the technology
occupations have among the lowest residual gender gaps may be greeted

with some skepticism. These are not occupations in which women are a large fraction
and the fields of training for many of them are also not those in which women
are abundant. Perhaps the finding is due to selection: the best men and the worst
women could leave technology occupations after a brief tenure. The men who leave
could begin their own businesses and have titles like CEO and the women who leave
could become science teachers. These individuals would not show up in the technology
occupations. Another issue is whether the low gender gaps in recent data are
because of the industries in which these individuals are hired rather than something
about the technology occupations.

I use the National Survey of College Graduates, 2003 (NSCG03) to explore if
women with technology degrees have different labor force participation rates than
those of other college graduate women. The answer is that they do not have lower
participation rates given age (entered as a quartic). In fact, women with BAs or
higher degrees in technology fields have somewhat greater participation than other
women.22 One reason for their slightly higher participation is that having young children
(less than two years old) reduces participation for all college graduate women
but there is a lesser impact on those with technology degrees. 'Tech" appears to
enable women to work part-time or to work mo
