model can approximate the lack of an exploitable JJ - it trade-off well enough to induce the
government to do what would be the right thing if it actually knew the true model. For the mis
specified model to reveal the lack of an exploitable trade-off, the government has to induce
adequate variation in inflation, which it does not do within an SCE. So the first story stops short
of being one in which evolution converges to "the best of all possible worlds." A more optimistic
outcome prevails in our next story, which endows the government with a model that allows its
misunderstandings of off-equilibrium-path choices eventually to vanish.
B. A Keynesian Account
The previous story is about how the troublesome possibility raised in Section MB plays out.
The model of Giorgio Primiceri (2006) envisions a world in which that possibility is off the table
because/(j", vx|p) = /(/>X|0O) for all vx and an SCE equals an REE. All of the action in
Primiceri's model comes from calibrating an initial 0O ^ 0O which leads to a transient stochastic
path that converges to an SCE presided over by Greenspan and whose transient dynamics mimic
the post-WWII United States.
Primiceri's definition of an SCE is special in that, while it sets the government's model/(jtc ' \ 6)
equal to the true model/(x'| p), it assumes that private agents make forecasts of inflation that do
not equal those implied by/(V| p). There is implicitly a third density f{xl) inside the model that
equals neither the government's/(V|(9) nor nature's f(xl\p). In particular, Primiceri assumes
thaXf{xt\0) =f(xt\p) is a version of a Solow-Tobin model that itself imputes irrational expectations
about inflation to the private sector.32
Primiceri has a time invariant true data-generating model featuring (i) an expectations augmented
Phillips curve; (ii) a Phillip Cagan (1956)-Friedman (1957) adaptive expectations scheme
that describes how the public forms expectations of inflation that appear in (i)33; (iii) an aggregate
demand equation that describes how the time t value of an uninterpreted government policy
instrument vt affects current and future gaps between the unemployment rate ut and a natural
rate of unemployment u?;34 and (iv) a one-period government loss function {rrt - 7r*)2 + \{ut ?
k?tN)2 where 7r* is a target rate of inflation and u^ is the government's estimate of natural unemployment
rate. The model allows the government's misperception of the natural rate to influence
policy, as advocated by Orphanides (2002, 2003). It also allows two other aspects of government
perceptions to influence policy in important ways, namely, perceptions about the persistence of
inflation and about the contemporaneous trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
Primiceri's maximum likelihood estimates succeed in accounting for the acceleration of inflation
in the 1960s and 1970s, then the fall in the 1980s in terms of the government's initial underestimates
of the natural unemployment rate, and a temporal pattern of underestimates of the
persistence of inflation and overestimates of the costs of disinflation coming from its estimated
inflation-unemployment trade-off.35 Figure 1 reproduces Primiceri's figure II, which shows his