For a law on the statute books to be effective in practice, the citizens must expect that the government
will succeed in enforcing the law. The government's legitimacy is important for its laws
to translate into effective order (Avner Greif 2006, 147-50), but more may be needed. In situations
like traffic, where the good equilibrium entails concerted choices, it also requires common
knowledge that others will abide by the law.
Not only may the government's laws remain ineffective; governments and their agents may
violate private property rights, violate contracts, and renege on promises. They expropriate assets
without compensation, make surprise changes in tax rates and regulations, and extort bribes for
licenses, in situations where the applicant has a valid claim to a license as well as in ones where
a license has to be granted in contravention of the laws and regulations.
Extortion by the government or its agents is, in many ways, similar to a tax, and deters economic
activity just as a tax does. But the uncertainty created by changing and arbitrary policies
can be worse than stable high tax rates. It is possible to achieve much despite high stable tax
rates; indeed, the United States, in its supposed glory decade of capitalism in the 1950s, had
much higher tax rates than it does now, and high-tax Scandinavian countries have not done
too badly. It is also possible to progress economically to a point, despite corrupt governments
and uncertain policies. Countries can reach middle-income levels despite some corruption, but
further growth requires much better institutions (William Easterly 2001, 234-35, 245-48; Dani
Rodrik 2003, 16-17).
Less-developed countries and transition economies often have weak formal governance.
This is to be expected. These countries have not faced the need to govern property and transactions
in large volumes?over large geographic and social distances, and for a sufficiently
long period of time?to develop the skills, experience, and organization of governance to the
extent demanded in modern economies and by traders and investors from developed market
economies. After all, these latter economies also needed long periods of time, measured in
decades or even centuries, to reach the level of formal governance they have today. The difference
is that today's emerging market economies are under much greater time pressure to
achieve comparable progress.
Even in advanced market economies, governments do not provide all governance. Many private
institutions exist to serve similar purposes. Sometimes they work in niches where the government
cannot or does not operate, for example, when the transaction is in violation of laws
regulating or prohibiting production or consumption of the commodity in question. But private
governance by social groups or industry associations can have advantages of information and
expertise, and can use them for arbitration of disputes that the state's courts would find too
complex to interpret and adjudicate. These private forums of governance also have at their disposal
quite dire punishments for members who violate the norm or code of conduct; they can
ostracize the person, or drive him out of business. Lisa Bernstein's (1992,2001) analyses of such
institutions of private order are among the best known. Courts recognize the advantages of these
arrangements, and adopt the attitude of forbearance: if the losing party in a dispute refuses to
abide by the verdict of a recognized arbitration tribunal, the court will not rehear the case, but
merely stand ready to enforce the arbitrators' judgment.
The fact that informal governance, including such basic concepts as trust, remains important
even in advanced market economies has been recognized and emphasized by Alan Greenspan
(2007, 256): "in a free society governed by the rights and responsibilities of its citizens, the
vast majority of transactions... presuppose trust in the word of... strangers.... Reputation and
the trust it fosters [are] the core attributes of market capitalism." However, he also recognizes
the limits of trust, and the need to guard against its abuse, again using private rather than state
solutions: "The most effective defense against fraud... is counterparties' surveillance. JPMorgan
thoroughly scrutinizes the balance sheet of Merrill Lynch before it lends. It does not look to the