punishment is himself a miscreant who has to be punished. Such penal codes can work in theory,
but are only partially effective in practice. For example, Princeton University's Honor Code
requires students to report observed instances of cheating in examinations, and anyone who fails
to do so also violates the Code. But surveys find that over 60 percent of respondents would not
turn in a friend who cheated (Jeremy Caplan 1996).

Therefore, people try to build bilateral relationships upon successful encounters. Joel Watson
(2002) constructs theoretical models of how bilateral relationships can be developed in a gradual
way. But in many situations a given pair of people may not have enough ongoing pairwise transaction
opportunities, and multilateral institutions may be unavoidable. An extreme example can
be found in Yogi Berra's dictum: "Always go to other people's funerals. Otherwise they won't
come to yours." Here is a social norm that must be enforced on a multilateral basis because bilateral
enforcement is infeasible in the very nature of the interaction. Without going to this extreme,
when each player may be involved in several bilateral relationships at the same time, and the
partnerships may dissolve and reform, the group still benefits from multilateral governance. The
Maghribi traders in Greif (2006) and Goldberg (2005) are an example of this.7
The information and communication channels that are needed for second-party governance
become weaker as the size and scope of the group expand. Successful governance in a large
group, or one with a large geographic or social spread, eventually requires a shift toward more
formal methods of governance (Shuhe Li 2003; Dixit 2004, chap. 3).

Li draws a distinction between formal rule-based governance and informal relation-based
governance, based on different costs of the two institutions. A rule-based formal legal system
requires substantial fixed costs to pass the laws and to establish the courts to adjudicate disputes,
and a police force to enforce the court's verdicts. But once the system is in place, people can
deal with strangers in relative confidence, so the marginal costs of expansion are low. A relation
based system has little or no fixed costs; one starts by dealing with close friends and neighbors.
But as business expands, one must deal with strangers and must first establish relationships with
them; therefore the marginal costs of expansion are high and rising. The low fixed cost, rising
marginal cost system will have lower overall costs for small-scale transactions, and the high
fixed cost, low marginal cost system will be better for larger scales.

Dixit constructs a more detailed spatial model of information transmission and its fading at
large distances to explain the idea of rising marginal costs. This leads to some surprising implications
for what happens when the relation-based system reaches the limit of its size.
The figure shows a continuum of economic agents located along a circle, which should be
interpreted as a socioeconomic rather than strictly geographic space. Each period they are randomly
matched in pairs to play a contracting game that is a prisoner's dilemma. The probability
of meeting a near-neighbor is higher than that of meeting one farther away. The probability of
meeting the same partner again is negligible, so there is no direct repeated game mechanism
to sustain honesty. But information about cheating is spread by the victim, and someone who
knows that you cheated in the past will not deal with you. The spread of information decays with
distance from the victim. The result is that people act honestly upon meeting close neighbors,
because cheating is more likely to be discovered by other close neighbors whom one is more