Finally, the incentives?carrots and sticks?for members to adhere to norms, and to partake
in imposing sanctions on others who violate the norms, must be designed correctly. Here the
finding of case studies contrasts with one result of many theoretical models of repeated prisoner's
dilemmas. These models broadly argue that the harshest feasible punishments support the most
cooperative outcomes. Case studies, however, find that successful systems use graduated punishments.
 In the first instance, members who violate the group's norm of conduct are given mild
reminders of the transgression and opportunities to make restitutions. If these don't work, punishments
 are gradually ratcheted up. Breaking off the relationship?the "grim trigger" strategy
that is the immediate response in many theoretical models?is the last resort in reality.
The theory of repeated games with imperfect monitoring shows that less than extreme punishment
 is optimal when it is likely to be triggered by error along the equilibrium path of play. But
for graduated punishments, something more is needed: a signal that the other player has cheated
should cause the first player to update some information about the other. In other words, we
need a repeated game with adverse selection as well as moral hazard. Dilip Abreu, B. Douglas
Bernheim, and Dixit (2005) construct some examples that illustrate the possibilities in such situations,
 but we await more general theoretical understanding of graduated punishments.
A. Internalizing Norms of Prosocial Behavior
When discussing contract enforcement, I emphasized the social value and practical importance
 of internalized prosocial preferences (first-party governance), and of deliberate efforts
to generate such preferences by socialization and education of children. Collective action also
benefits from similar preferences. Dixit (2008) constructs a simple example that can serve as a
starter model for this.
Consider a society of n individuals. Each individual i can expend two types of effort, private
xt and public zr The resulting income of individual / is given by
yt = (1 + z)xn
where z is the average of the zr Thus public effort creates a public input that raises the average
and marginal product of private input.
The private or selfish utility of individual / is
With this specification, the noncooperative Nash equilibrium has no public effort:
(1) *, = 3/2, z, = 0, )\ = 3/2, ?, = 3/4,
but the cooperative optimum has positive public effort yielding higher selfish utility:
(2) xt = 2, Zl= 1, yt - 4, ux = 1.
If the society cannot compel individuals to exert the public effort directly, it may induce them
to do so by changing their preferences to include a prosocial element. Suppose individual 1 is
given a prosocial utility
n
i=2