different beliefs to the government and other agents. Intelligent design is normative ("what should
be") economics, but when it influences policymakers, it becomes positive ("what is") economics.
Some researchers in the intelligent design tradition ignore the distinction between positive and
normative economics. Thus, Robert J. Barro (1979), Lucas and Nancy L. Stokey (1983), and S.
Rao Aiyagari et al. (2002) use normative theories to understand observed time series properties
of government debt and taxes. It is also true that some policy advisors have enough faith that
evolution produces good outcomes to recommend copying best practices (for example, see John
Maynard Keynes 1913). If only good things survive the tests of time and practice, evolution pro?
duces intelligent design.
Theories of out-of-equilibrium learning tell us not always to expect that. An observational
equivalence possibility that emerges from the rational expectations econometrics of Section III
sets the stage for Section IV, which describes how a system of adaptive agents converges to a
self-confirming equilibrium in which all agents have correct forecasting distributions for events
observed often along an equilibrium path, but possibly incorrect views about events that are rarely
observed. This matters because intelligent design of rational expectations equilibria hinges on
the government's expectations about events that will not be observed. Self-confirming equilibria
allow wrong models that match historical data to survive and to influence policy. Section V men?
tions examples from a millennium of monetary history that culminated in the ideas expressed by
Ricardo. To tell stories about the emergence of US inflation in the 1970s and its conquest under
Volcker and Greenspan, Section VI uses adaptive models in which the government solves intel?
ligent design problems with probability models that are misspecified, either permanently or tem?
porarily. While these stories differ in many interesting details, they all suggest that choices of
the monetary authorities were affected by misunderstandings that do not occur within a rational
expectations equilibrium.1 These "misspecification stories" also provide a backhanded defense
for inflation targeting.
I. Intelligent Design with Common Beliefs
What I call intelligent design is to solve a Pareto problem for a model in which every agent
inside the model optimizes in light of information and incentive constraints and a common
probability model. Intelligent design is a coherent response to Lucas's (1976) indictment of pre
rational expectations macroeconomic policy design procedures. Lucas rejected those procedures
because they incorporated private agents' decision rules that were not best responses to govern?
ment policy under the equilibrium probability measure. The cross-equation restrictions imposed
by a common belief assumption fix that problem.
Let/denote a probability density and xt a history xt,xt-i,,..,x0. Partition xt = [y? v,]', where
vt is a vector of decisions taken by a government and yt is a vector of all other variables. Let
/(/?,vx|p) be a joint density conditional on a parameter vector p?ilp. Government chooses a  sequence h of functions
(1) v, = ft,(x?, r=>0,
to maximize a Pareto criterion that can be expressed as expected utility under density/(jt??|p):
(2) \u{f,v-\pW^\p)d{y-,v-).