or guilt in cheating others.6 If individuals have such preferences, opportunistic behavior can be
reduced or eliminated at the source and governance simplified.
It is important to recognize prosocial preferences, not merely because they exist, but also
because the intrinsic incentives they generate can interact with the standard monetary or other
extrinsic incentives (see Roland B?nabou and Jean Tir?le 2003). Reforms to improve incentives
that are typically advocated can prove counterproductive if they destroy the existing benefits of
prosocial preferences.
The usual theory of prosocial preferences relies on an evolutionary mechanism of group selec?
tion. A society whose members have such preferences can take collective action that benefits the
whole group in its competition with other groups. But this runs into a fundamental problem: can
such social equilibrium be stable, or will it be destroyed because the selfish mutants that arise
within a social group will seize more of the gain, and therefore be more fit in the sense of evolu?
tionary dynamics, than cooperators? To sustain the good equilibrium, societies also need some
mechanism whereby the selfish are prevented from getting a higher payoff. This can be achieved
if the social norms of behavior include a mechanism for punishing noncooperators, at a personal
cost if need be. And indeed several experiments have found such behavior is widespread and
may even have a neurological basis (Colin Camerer 2003, 46-47). Robert Boyd, Herbert Gintis,
Samuel Bowles, and Peter Richardson (2003) show that a cooperative equilibrium can be sus?
tained by cultural group-selection for such "strong reciprocator" strategies. When the prevailing
strategy in the population is one that reciprocates nice behavior but punishes selfish deviations,
selfish mutants cannot flourish.
Prosocial preferences are not merely exogenous and genetically transmitted. Societies go
to great lengths to instill such preferences in children during their process of socialization in
families, school, and religious establishments, and continue the process in adults. Growth of
such preferences is seen in experiments on ultimatum and dictator games (Colin Camerer 2003,
65-67). When these experiments are conducted on children of different ages, very young chil?
dren behave selfishly. By age 8 they develop a significant sense of equality. True prosocial prefer?
ences develop gradually thereafter, with some relapses, finally to an adult fair-mindedness. Thus
a long process of education and experience instills internalized norms into people's preferences.
Economists have at last begun to recognize the practical importance of deliberate social for?
mation of prosocial preferences, and incorporate it in their theories. Guido Tabellini (2008) mod?
els this in the context of contract enforcement; other recent contributions include Assar Lindbeck
and Sten Nyberg (2006) on work norms. In these models, each parent makes an independent
decision on the upbringing of his/her own child, and a Nash equilibrium is studied. B?nabou and
Tir?le (2006) consider transmission of beliefs rather than preferences, and the choice variable
is the level of taxation determined through a political process. Later in the context of collective
action, I offer a simple example of a political choice of education to instill prosocial preferences  in children.
B. Integration and Corporate Governance
First-party enforcement can be achieved between firms by merging the contracting parties
into one entity with a common objective. Williamson's (1985, chap. 4, 5) transaction cost theory
of vertical integration is the most prominent example of this. The merger of two firms does not