mid-2015.” In December 2012, the FOMC switched from guidance specifying a
date for policy action (calendar guidance) to a description of the conditions that
would have to be met for rates to be raised ( state-contingent guidance). Specifically,
policymakers promised not even to consider raising the policy rate until unemploy-
ment had fallen at least to 6.5 percent, as long as inflation and inflation expectations
remained moderate. A year later, this statement was strengthened further, with the
FOMC indicating that no rate increase would occur until “well past the time” that
unemployment declined below 6.5 percent. In principle,  state-contingent guidance,
which ties future policy rates to economic conditions, is preferable to calendar guid-
ance because it permits the market’s rate expectations to adjust endogenously to
incoming information bearing on the outlook (Feroli et al. 2017). However, calendar
guidance has the  not-inconsiderable advantages of simplicity and directness, and it
can be adjusted if needed (Williams 2016).
The increasingly explicit guidance by the FOMC ultimately had the desired effect
of shifting market rate expectations in a dovish direction:  two-year Treasury yields
declined to about 0.25 percent in the second half of 2011, where they remained for
several years. Table 2, using the event study methodology described earlier, shows
the sum of  one-day responses of several key asset prices to the first two calendar
guidance announcements, in August 2011 and January 2012. The table shows that
the Fed’s announcements appear to have moved interest rates down significantly,
increasing stimulus. The two announcements were also associated with a decline in
the dollar (not shown) and a rise in equity prices.
Other evidence suggests that these announcements worked as intended: Femia,
Friedman, and Sack (2015) showed that, during this period, professional forecasters
reacted to FOMC guidance by repeatedly marking down the unemployment rate
they expected to prevail when the Committee lifted the funds rate from zero, imply-
ing a perceived change in the Fed’s reaction function in the  lower-for-longer direc-
tion. Using information drawn from interest rate options, Raskin (2013) came to a
similar conclusion. Carvalho, Hsu, and Nechio (2016), counting particular words in
magazine and newspaper articles to measure policy expectations, found that unan-
ticipated communications by the Fed influenced  longer-term interest rates, while
Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson (2012) concluded that forward guidance posi-
tively affected inflation and growth expectations.
I have been discussing QE and forward guidance separately, but in practice the
two tools are closely intertwined. As noted earlier, QE works in part by  implicitly Table 2—Responses of Asset Prices and Yields to Two Fed
Forward Guidance Announcements
2-year Treasuries −10
10-year Treasuries −27
30-year Treasuries −14
Mortgage-backed securities −17
AAA corporate bonds −17
SP500 index5.61
Notes: Sums of  one-day responses to announcements of August 9, 2011,
and January 25, 2012. Yield changes are in basis points, stock price changes
are in percentage points.
Source: Author’s calculations