957
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
signaling the likely path of policy rates; increasingly, central banks (notably the 
ECB) have made this connection explicit, for example, by promising no rate 
increases until well after the conclusion of asset purchase programs. Policymakers 
can also offer guidance about future asset purchases (Greenwood, Hanson, and 
Vayanos 2015) or even tie the trajectory of asset holdings to the level of rates, as 
when the FOMC indicated that it would begin to pare down its balance sheet only 
after the policy rate had moved sufficiently above zero. And both asset purchases 
and forward guidance affect asset prices in complicated ways, making it difficult to 
separate the effects of the two tools (Eberly, Stock, and Wright 2019). An interesting 
attempt at making that decomposition is the work of Swanson (2017), who extended 
the  event-study methods of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) to the  post-crisis 
period. He showed that, during  2009–2015, movements in asset yields and prices 
during  30-minute windows around FOMC announcements were dominated by two 
factors: (i) changes in the expected path of the federal funds rate, which Swanson 
identified with forward guidance, and (ii) changes in the level of  long-term interest 
rates, which he identified with QE. With these identifying assumptions, he found 
that both forward guidance and QE significantly and persistently affected a range of 
asset prices, in a manner comparable to  pre-crisis policies.
The Fed’s experience during the  post-crisis era illustrates the more general point 
that central banks, collectively, have been learning how to make better use of for -
ward guidance. Like the Fed, the Bank of England moved from qualitative guid-
ance to explicit,  state-contingent guidance. The Bank of Japan has used increasingly 
aggressive guidance, both  state-contingent and calendar. The ECB has employed 
statements and press conferences effectively to guide expectations about how it will 
deploy its complex mix of policy tools. Charbonneau and Rennison (2015) pro-
vides a chronology and a review of the evidence on  post-crisis forward guidance. 
Altavilla et al. (2019) used a statistical analysis similar to that of Gürkaynak, Sack, 
and Swanson (2005) and Swanson (2017) to identify the key dimensions of ECB 
communication. Hubert and Labondance (2018) found that the ECB’s forward guid-
ance persistently lowered rates over the entire term structure.
Overall, the evolving evidence suggests that forward guidance can be a powerful 
policy tool, with the potential to shift the public’s expectations in a way that increases 
the degree of accommodation at the lower bound. Communication can also reduce 
perceived uncertainty and, through this channel, lower risk premiums on bonds and 
other assets ( Bundick, Herriford, and Smith 2017) . And, like Draghi’s famous “what-
ever it takes” statement in July 2012, timely communication can reduce perceived 
tail risks, promoting confidence ( Hattori, Schrimpf, and Sushko 2016) . The limits to 
forward guidance depend on what the public understands, and what it believes. In 
normal times, the general public does not pay much attention to central bank state-
ments, so robust policies should be designed to be effective even if they are followed 
closely only by financial market participants. Even sophisticated players can misun-
derstand, as in the taper tantrum, which means that policymakers must communicate 
consistently and intelligibly.
Ensuring the credibility of forward guidance is also essential. The personal repu-
tations and skills of policymakers matter for credibility, but since policymakers can 
bind neither themselves nor their successors, institutional reputation is important as 
well. Policymakers have an incentive to follow through on earlier promises because 