illustrative calculations. The bottom line - that clubs with penalties or sanctions on
nonparticipants can support a strong international climate agreement - is summa-
rized at the end of the paper.
C. A Sketch of the Climate Club
The idea of a Climate Club should be viewed as an idealized solution of the
free-riding problem that prevents the efficient provision of global public goods. Like
free trade or physics in a vacuum, it will never exist in its pure form. Rather, it is a
blueprint that can be used to understand the basic forces at work and sketch a system
that can overcome free-riding.
Here is a brief description of the proposed Climate Club: the club is an agreement by
participating countries to undertake harmonized emissions reductions. The agreement
envisioned here centers on an "international target carbon price" that is the focal provi-
sion of an international agreement. For example, countries might agree that each coun-
try will implement policies that produce a minimum domestic carbon price of $25 per
ton of carbon dioxide (C02). Countries could meet the international target price require-
ment using whatever mechanism they choose - carbon tax, cap-and-trade, or a hybrid.
A key part of the club mechanism (and the major difference from all current pro-
posals) is that nonparticipants are penalized. The penalty analyzed here is uniform
percentage tariffs on the imports of nonparticipants into the club region. Calculations
suggest that a relatively low tariff rate will induce high participation as long as the
international target carbon price is up to $50 per ton.
An important aspect of the club is that it creates a strategic situation in which
countries acting in their self-interest will choose to enter the club and undertake high
levels of emissions reductions because of the structure of the incentives. The balance
of this study examines the club structure more carefully and provides an empirical
model to calculate its effectiveness.
II. Background on International Agreements on Climate Change
A. Basic Free-riding Equilibrium
There is a large literature on the strategic aspects of international environmental
agreements, including those focused on climate change. One important strand is the
analytical work on global public goods. The clear message is that without special
features the outcome will be a prisoners' dilemma or tragedy of the commons in
which there is too little abatement. This point is illustrated with a simple model that
will form the backbone of the empirical model below.
I begin by analyzing the costs and benefits of national climate policies in a
noncooperative (NC) framework (Nash 1950). In the NC framework, countries act
individually and are neither rewarded nor penalized by other countries for their pol-
icies. The analysis assumes that countries maximize their national economic wel-
fare and ignores partisan, ideological, myopic, and other nonoptimizing behaviors.
While history is full of wooden-headed actions of countries and their leaders, as
well as policies that are farsighted and attend to global welfare, attempting to incor-
porate these features is beyond the scope of this study of 