28 percent. The top-bracket US corporate profits tax rate was cut from 46 percent to
34 percent during the Reagan administration. The top US capital gains tax rate was
reduced from 28 percent to 20 percent in 1981 (though raised back to 28 percent
again in 1987 during the Reagan presidency). If the Laffer Curve epidemic had even
a minor effect on these changes, it must have had tremendous impact on measures
of output and prices.
Figure 4 shows Google Ngrams results for several other examples of economic
theories, though less appropriate for our purposes because they are not just narra-
tives, they are more substantively original than the Laffer Curve. Still, even import-
ant original theories have associated narratives and might have SIR dynamics. The
IS-LM model (Hicks 1937); the multiplier-accelerator model (Samuelson 1939);
the overlapping generations model (Samuelson 1958); and the real business cycle
model (Kydland and Prescott 1982) - all show hump-shaped patterns akin to those
that can be produced by the Kermack-McKendrick model, as seen in Figure 2. In
three of the cases, the epidemic first became visible more than a decade after the
model was introduced, a phenomenon that is also explainable within the Kermack-
McKendrick framework, where epidemics may go unobserved for a while after they
have just started from very small beginnings.
VII. Feedback Variations: Multipliers and Bubbles
To think of the events surrounding the explosion of the Laffer Curve as a social
epidemic is to think about feedback. The original Kahn-Keynes multiplier model
in macroeconomics (Kahn 1931, Keynes 1936), with its famous "multiple rounds
of expenditure" might be described as a sort of epidemic model but with the conta-
gion rate c replaced by the marginal propensity to consume (MPC), and with a zero
removal rate r. It was an appealing feedback model, on paper. Any stimulus to the
economy, call it /0 to show parallel with our epidemic model, increases someone's
income. This individual, who then spends MPC of that income, generating income
for yet another who spends MPC of that income, and so on, such that national
income rises gradually, and eventually the result is an increase of national income
of 70/(l - MPC).
In practice, however, the purely Keynesian form of contagion is limited. The
permanent income hypothesis suggests that Keynesian contagion may be very low
if people do not believe that the spurt in income will be permanent. Some research
supports low multipliers, for example Shapiro (2016) reports on research of his
own and of coauthors, based on survey questions conducted by the University of
Michigan's Survey of Consumers, of the impact of fiscal stimulus policies. The pre-
sented counterfactuals (what would you have done differently if you did not receive
the tax rebate check) found that, at least at the time of their survey, the marginal
propensity to consume may have been quite low, between one-quarter and one-third,
suggesting a multiplier little different from one.
A different special kind of epidemic model describes speculative bubbles.
Speculative asset prices themselves would not generally be well modeled directly in
terms of this model since the model yields smooth-through-time paths. Most specu-
lative asset prices are nearly random walks on a day-to-day basis. The reason is
obvious: if it were possible for smart money to predict the day-to-day p