fiscal deficit. Were they displayed as fractions of the value of outstanding debt, so
they became surprises in rates of return, they would be much larger. It is clearly not
a good approximation to model the US economy as if debt were real, even though a
considerable part of the literature on optimal fiscal policy does so.

The southern countries in the euro area are now reckoning with the consequences
of their having, by joining the euro, made their sovereign debt real. The 2008-2009
crisis led to great expansion of their debts, and the nominal debt cushion is not avail
able to them. Greece already has defaulted on its debt, and quite possibly before the
crisis resolves other southern tier EMU members will as well.

When only distorting taxes are available, there is a benefit to keeping tax rates
stable. A highly variable time path of tax rates produces higher deadweight loss than
a more stable path that delivers the same cumulative revenue. With nominal debt,
flexible prices, and costless inflation, it is optimal to keep revenue very stable, allow
ing inflation to absorb most of any fiscal shocks. While this result is well known,
Siu (2004) and Schmidt-Grohé and Uribe (2001) have shown that when nominal

rigidities are present, variation in inflation becomes costly, and that this leads to very
little use of inflation to smooth tax rates except (as Siu shows) when fiscal distur
bances are very large. The model in Section IIIC below argues that this conclusion is
sensitive to those papers having allowed only for one-period debt. With longer debt,
the costs of tax smoothing via surprise inflation can be much lower. In any case,
the economic situation in the southern-tier European countries probably reflects the
"very large fiscal shock" case.

Nominal Debt is (Almost) Non-Defaultable, Hence Important to the Lender of Last
Resort.—By the usual indicators, the first two countries in Table 1 are not in notice
ably worse shape than the last three. But the last three are selling their bonds at much
lower interest rates. This reflects the fact that the last three issue mainly nominal debt,
denominated in their own country currency, while the first two have issued real (i.e.,
euro) debt. There is a non-trivial probability that the first two will default in some
form, while the latter three are quite unlikely to default, because their debt is nominal.
Economists and journalists sometimes treat inflation as a form of default, but it is
not. Default is a situation where the contracted payments cannot be delivered, and
the contract does not specify what happens in that eventuality. For private firms, this
leads to renegotiation and/or court proceedings. There can be a long period in which
investors cannot get access to their investments and the amount that will be returned
to them remains unknown. Creditors holding different maturities or types of debt