confirm or disconfirm one's thoughts. It seems that the human mind strives to reach
enduring understanding of events by forming them into a narrative that is embedded
in social interactions.

Some have suggested that it is stories that most distinguish us from animals,
and even that our species be called Homo narrans (Fisher 1984) or Homo narrator
(Gould 1994) or Homo narrativus (Ferrand and Weil 2001) depending on whose

Latin we use. Might this be a more accurate description than Homo sapiens, i.e.,
wise man? It is more flattering to think of ourselves as Homo sapiens, but not necessarily
more accurate.

It is important to note that narratives may not generally be acted upon reflectively,
since, in the words of psychologists Schank and Abelson (1977), they may be taken
as scripts. When in doubt as to how to behave in an ambiguous situation, people may
think back to narratives and adopt a role as if acting in a play they have seen before.
The narratives have the ability to produce social norms that partially govern our
activities, including our economic actions. The "prudent person rule" in finance is
one of those norms that has economic impact: fiduciaries and experts do not have the
right to act on their own judgment. They must instead mimic the "prudent person,"
and this, in effect, means following a script (Shiller 2002).

Popular narratives may have a spirit of "us versus them," a Manichean tone of
revealed evil described of others in the story. Jokes are quite often at somebody else's
expense - members of some other group. In extreme cases, they may be focused on
events as evidence of some kind of imagined conspiracy.

Of course, it is rational for people to be alert to conspiracies, since history is filled
with actual examples of them. But the human mind seems to have a built-in interest
in conspiracies, a tendency to form a personal identity and loyalty to friends built
around perceived plots of others. This disposition appears to be related to human
patterns of reciprocity, of vengeance against presumed enemies, a tendency that has
been found relevant to economic behavior (Fehr and Gächter 2000). The disposition
may be amplified individually by brain damage, into a paranoid personality disorder
that is recognized in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM V)
of the American Psychiatric Association as afflicting 2.3 percent to 4.4 percent of
the US adult population.4

There is a daunting amount in the scholarly literature about narratives, in a number
of academic departments, and associated concepts of memetics, norms, social
epidemics, contagion of ideas. While we may never be able to explain why some
narratives "go viral" and significantly influence thinking while other narratives do
not, we would be wise to add some analysis of what people are talking about if we
are to search for the source of economic fluctuations. We economists should not just
throw up our hands and decide to ignore this vast literature. We need to understand
the narrative basis for macroeconomic fluctuations, and to think about how narrative
economics ought to be more informing of policy actions now and in the future.
Narratives are major vectors of rapid change in culture, in Zeitgeist, and ultimately
in economic behavior. Spreading narratives, often many parallel narr
