with simulations of the economic model to estimate the parameters p. Thus, let the auxiliary
model have a log likelihood function given by equation (8) and, for the data sample in hand, compute
the maximum likelihood estimate 0. For different p's, simulate paths xT(p) for r = 0,...,i
from the economic model. Think of using these artificial data to evaluate the score function for
the auxiliary model sT(xT(p),0) for each r. Gallant and Tauchen estimate p by setting the average
score for the auxiliary model15

(io) -h-?X(*T(p),?)

as close to zero as possible when measured by a quadratic form of the type used in GMM. If the
auxiliary model fits well, this method gives good estimates of the parameters p of the economic
model. In particular, the indirect estimator is as efficient as maximum likelihood in the ideal
case where the economic and auxiliary models are observationally equivalent.
B. A Troublesome Possibility

This ideal case raises the following question: what happens when macroeconomic policymakers
incorrectly use what, from nature's point of view, is actually an auxiliary model? Data give
the government no indication that it should abandon its model. Nevertheless, the government
can make major policy design mistakes because its misunderstands the consequences of policies
that it has not chosen.16 The possibility that the government uses what, unbeknownst to it, is an
auxiliary model, not a structural one, sets the stage for the self-confirming equilibria that play
an important role in the adaptive learning models of the following section and in the stories to  be told in Sections V and VI.
IV. Adaptive Learning Models and Their Limiting Outcomes

Section II described how a survival argument for equating objective and subjective distributions
falls short in many economies. This section takes up where that discussion left off by
describing transient and limiting outcomes in models in which agents make decisions by using
statistical models that at least temporarily are misspecified. I summarize findings from a literature
that studies systems of agents who use forward-looking decision algorithms based on temporary
models that they update using recursive least squares algorithms (see Albert Marcet and
Sargent 1989a; George W. Evans and Seppo Honkapohja 1999, 2001; Woodford 1990; and Drew
Fudenberg and David K. Levine 1998).17 These adaptive systems can have limiting outcomes
in which objective and subjective distributions are identical over frequently observed events,
but not over rarely observed events. That causes problems for intelligent macroeconomic policy
design. I shall use such adaptive systems to tell some stories in Section VI. I begin by defining
population objects that suppose that agents have finished learning.

A. Self-Confirming Equilibrium

A true data-generating process and an approximating model, respectively, are
(ID  /(/>? and /(y>"|0).
