eliminate the problem of contract enforcement; it merely transforms the contract into a principal
agent problem within one firm. Economic governance between distinct economic units becomes
corporate governance within one unit. The costs of contract enforcement are part of transaction
costs broadly defined; therefore, the choice between external and internal enforcement depends
on the comparison of the two costs.
Family-owned conglomerates in less-developed countries exemplify this choice. These firms
often engage in activities that have no conceivable economic synergies or economies of scope
that explain their integration. Rather, the firm provides an internal capital market, when external
flows of funds would be plagued by problems of weak governance. Of course, integration has its
own cost: by compartmentalizing the capital market, it may preclude the reallocation of capital
to its most productive use. This inefficiency has to be tolerated as a second best if the costs of
external governance would be even higher.
The possibility of second-party enforcement based on repeated interaction brings a third
option into the mix. The firms can remain distinct, but contracts between them can be self
enforcing as an equilibrium of their repeated game. Barak Richman (2004) discusses such three
way choices.
C. Bilateral and Multilateral Self-Enforcement
In second-party institutions, I include not only repeated interaction between a given pair, but
also multilateral enforcement among a community of traders. This sense of "second party" is
different from that of Greif (2006, chap. 9); what I call multilateral second-party institutions, he
calls "collectivist." Examples of my usage thus include Greifs Maghribi traders (chap. 3), and
also industry associations and Better Business Bureaus that monitor their members' conduct,
investigate complaints and arbitrate disputes, impose sanctions where appropriate, and publicize
miscreants' names so others can ostracize them, or at least be on guard when dealing with them.
Bernstein (1992, 2001) studies two such industry-based institutions of governance. Other prominent
 examples are the various rotating saving and credit associations of small groups of friends
that underlie many systems of microcredit (see Timothy Besley, Stephen Coate, and Glenn Loury
1993).
Second-party governance, whether bilateral or multilateral, attempts to resolve prisoner's
dilemmas by repetition. For one-sided dilemmas, this is essentially an "efficiency wage" idea:
the second mover should get enough surplus from each stage game to exceed the annuity he
would get by investing the one-time gain from cheating. Then the resolution of two-sided simultaneous-
action dilemmas can be thought of as a two-sided efficiency wage: the total surplus
available from mutual cooperation in each stage game must be divided in such a way that each
player gets enough to offset the temptation to cheat.
Enforcement on a multilateral basis brings further problems. If A cheats B in their current
match-up, A may not expect to meet B sufficiently frequently in the future, but he expects to meet
other members of the group, such as C, D..., and they will inflict the established punishment,
be it mere withholding of future trades, or more serious sanctions such as fines and ostracism.
This prospect can keep A honest in his dealings with B. But this process has its difficulties. It
requires a stable community with many ongoing interactions, and good information flows about
members' behavior. It is not enough to know that cheating occurred; the cheater must be identified.
 Otherwise the punishment cannot be targeted, and blunt punishments may be insufficient
to deter specific cheaters. Also, C, D... may have to incur some private cost to punish A on
B's behalf. Then participation in punishment becomes a public good, and individuals have the
temptation to free-ride just as in any other context of private provision of a public good. "Second
round enforcement" can overcome this: anyone who fails to participate in a socially approved