I am reminded of a book about the 1920s, Only Yesterday: An Informal History
of the 1920s, written by a popular writer, Frederick Lewis Allen, published in 1931,
which commented on the early stages of the Great Depression in its afterword.14
His history emphasizes all the little silly fads and diversions that occupied people's
attentions, and might be considered a history of silliness, except that some of the
events portrayed were ominous or deadly.

The 1920-1921 recession also began with the early stages of widespread public
fear of Communism. A computer search of news and newspapers on ProQuest

shows relatively little use of the term Communist before 1919. Certainly, Karl Marx
and Friedrich Engels wrote their Communist Manifesto long before, in 1848, and
newspapers did write about them, though much less frequently. Most people could
not be bothered to learn some abstract Communist theory if there had never been a
real Communist revolution. Marx and Engels often were seen as minor eccentrics.
But after 1918, there was a sudden jump in focus on Communism.

Allen (1931, p. 38) writes of the Big Red Scare period in America

They [ Americans ] were listening to ugly rumors of a huge radical conspiracy
against the government and institutions of the United States. They had

their ears cocked for the detonation of bombs and the tramp of Bolshevist

armies. They seriously thought - at least millions of them did, millions of
otherwise reasonable citizens - that a Red revolution might begin in the  United States the next month or next week.
Notably, there is a very dramatic story of the sudden advance of communism

after World War I, and its brutality: the murder of Czar Nicholas II and his entire
family by Communists on June 17, 1918. It is a particularly repellent story of an
internationally recognized family (readers all over the world had seen them in
photogravures in newspapers and postcards, much as we routinely see the British
Royalty today), who were asked to dress up, then were seated and executed at
the surprise appearance of a firing squad. The announcement of the Czar's death
appeared in newspapers by June 28, 1918, but not all the gory details were made
available to the public until the Report of the Inquiry at Ekaterinburg in September
1920, in the middle of the Depression. Then this story - certainly a contagious
story, and one that would attract readers - was reported in excruciating detail by
newspapers around the world. The story lives on today; it persists in diminished
form as a long, slow epidemic of the kind with low contagion rate but equally low
removal rate.

There was also an oil price shock, which generated its own narratives. US oil
prices rose over 50 percent from mid- 19 19 to the end of 1920, in the middle of the
Depression. Because consumer prices were falling then, the real price increase was
even greater, and by the end of 1920, real oil prices were at the highest level in the
twentieth century before 1
