envelope winners would be paid $2, but if the chip came from the Tails envelope
they would win $3.

Of course the optimal strategy in this game is to only circle numbers in the Tails
row since those have a 50 percent higher expected payoff, but this strategy was not
obvious to everyone. About half the subjects (MBA students at a top university)
adopted the correct strategy of circling only Tails, but the rest used what might
called an "inept mixed strategy," dividing their choices between Heads and Tails,
with the most common allocation being three Tails and two Heads, matching the
ratio of the payoffs.3

The question that Kahneman and I were most interested in, however, was not

these initial choices. This was an experiment about learning. So we had the subjects
repeat the same task nine more times. Each time the subjects got feedback about the
outcome of the coin toss and the number drawn, and the winning guessers were paid
in cash immediately in plain view of the other subjects. Try to guess the results as a
thought experiment.

Of the subjects that did not figure out the "all Tails" strategy immediately, how
many learned to use that strategy over the course of the nine additional trials? The
answer is one. One subject switched at some point to an all Tails strategy, but that
subject was offset by another subject who had circled only Tails on the first trial, but
then switched to the inept mixed strategy at some point during the "learning" phase.
It is instructive to consider why there was essentially no learning in this experiment.
We know from psychology that learning takes place when there is useful,

immediate feedback. When learning to drive we quickly see how much pressure to
use on the accelerator and brake pedals in order to start and stop smoothly. In the
experiment, however, the subjects were first told the outcome of the coin flip, then
the number drawn. Obviously, about half the time the coin came up Heads, and
those who were including Heads in their portfolio were pleased to be still in the
game (if only for another few seconds). Furthermore, every time that someone won
some money from a Heads outcome, there was some reinforcement for continuing
to include some of that "strategy" in the portfolio.

The general point is that learning can be difficult even in a very simple environment.
Those who teach an introductory course in economics know that many

of the first principles that are basic to rational choice models (such as the notion
of opportunity costs) are by no means intuitively obvious to the students. But our
models assume they can understand much more difficult concepts such as backward
induction.

As for the argument that people will do better in experimental tasks if the stakes
are raised, there is little or no evidence to support this hypothesis. The first empirical
test of this idea was conducted by David Grether and Charles Plott (1979) in the
context of an investigation of the "preference reversal phenomenon," discovered by
psychologists Sarah Lichtenstein and Paul Slovic (1971). Lichtenstein and Slovic
presented subjects with two gambles, one a near sure thing they called the p-bet (for
high probability) such as a 35/36 chance to win $10, the other more risky called the
$-bet, such as an 1 1 /36 chance to win $30, a higher potential payoff. Subjects