existing kidney exchange organizations around the world. The large-scale further
progress that is needed (while we wait until transplants are no longer needed) will depend on increasing the scale and scope of kidney exchange.
For example, given the substantial number of transplants produced by chains
begun by living non-directed donors, it would be desirable to allow some chains to be initiated by deceased donors. Presently, virtually all deceased donors are non-di-rected, but each deceased donor kidney results in only a single transplant. Melcher et al. (2016) propose allowing chains to be initiated by deceased donors, which would
require changes in regulation that are currently under consideration in the United States.
114 Increasing the average number of transplants from a deceased donor kidney
even from one to two would more than double the reach of kidney exchange.

The approach that I think has the greatest possibility to reduce suffering from
kidney failure—both in the developed world and in the developing world, where it is also major cause of death—is to expand kidney exchange globally, including to places where transplantation is not widely available because of financial con-straints.
115 This is feasible because in the developed world transplantation is so

much cheaper than dialysis that each transplant generates savings sufficient to pay for the inclusion of a foreign pair in kidney exchange, for free, including funds to pay for their long-term post-surgical care after returning home.
116 Rees et al.

(2017a) set forth a proposal for Global Kidney Exchange (GKE), and report on the first foreign pair included in an American chain in this way.
117 That patient-donor

pair was a married couple from the Philippines, where national insurance does not cover treatment for ESRD, but where high quality hospitals exist that can conduct transplants and care for patients and donors post transplant.
The reaction to the GKE proposal has included both support in the US and

Europe, and vigorous opposition that finds GKE repugnant and equates it with ille-gal organ trafficking.
118 A related objection is that GKE would inevitably become

entangled with black markets for kidneys in poor countries. Delmonico and Ascher (2017) write that ethical GKE with patient-donor pairs from the developing world “is not feasible when the culture is so experienced with organ sales.” They argue that efforts to ban kidney sales have failed to such an extent that transplanting patients
114 The proposal for deceased-donor initiated chains met with an initially enthusiastic political reception (see
https://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2016/06/white-house-organ-summit-video-and.html), and is now wending
its way more slowly through bureaucratic channels. In 2018 a deceased-donor initiated chain was reported in Italy (http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2018/04/deceased-donor-kidney-exchange-chain-in.html). It would also be useful to increase the supply of deceased donors. Other avenues that might possibly increase the scope
of exchange involve including other organs in exchanges (see Dickerson and Sandholm 2017; Sönmez and Ünver 2017; Samstein et al. 20