economic and strategic aspects and leave other aspects to specialists in those areas
(see Bordoff 2009 and Brainard and Sorkin 2009).

Two approaches to trade sanctions might be considered. A first approach, called
carbon duties, would put tariffs on imports of nonparticipants in relation to the carbon
content of imports. A second approach, called uniform penalty tariffs, would
apply uniform percentage tariffs to all imports from nonparticipating countries. I
discuss each of these in turn.

The central question addressed in this analysis is whether a club design which
incorporates penalty tariffs on nonparticipants can produce a stable equilibrium or
coalition that significantly improves on the noncooperative equilibrium.

D. Carbon Duties

A first approach called carbon duties - commonly proposed among scholars who
have advocated penalties - would put tariffs on goods imported from nonparticipants
in relation to the goods' carbon content. (These are also known as countervailing
duties, but I will use the more descriptive term here.) Under this approach, imports
from nonparticipants into a country would be taxed at the border by an amount that
would be equal to the domestic price of carbon (or perhaps by an agreed-upon international
target carbon price) times the carbon content of the import. Alternatively,
under a cap-and-trade regime, the requirement might be that importers purchase
emissions allowances to cover the carbon content of imports.

The technique of carbon duties is commonly used when countries violate their trade
agreements, and is also included in several international environmental agreements
(see Barrett 2003 for an extensive history). The purposes of carbon duties are to reduce
leakage, to level the competitive playing field, and to reduce emissions. Increased
participation - which is emphasized here - is usually not included as a goal of the
sanctions. See Frankel (2009) for a review of proposals and their relation to trade law.
Studies of carbon duties indicate they are complicated to design, have limited coverage,
and do little to induce participation. As an example, consider C02 emissions
from US coal-fired electricity generation, which is a major source of emissions. Since
the United States exports less than 1 percent of its electricity generation, the effect
of carbon duties here would be negligible. Modeling studies confirm the intuition
about the limited effect of the carbon-duties mechanism. For example, McKibbin
and Wilcoxen (2009) study the effects of carbon duties for the United States and the
European Union. They find that the proposal would be complex to implement and
would have little effect on emissions. Estimates of this approach using the C-DICE
model described below also indicate that carbon duties have limited effectiveness in
promoting deep abatement (see the online Appendix for more details).

E. Uniform Tariff Mechanisms

Given the complexity of carbon duties, I propose and analyze an alternative and simpler
approach: a uniform percentage tariff. Under this approach, participating countries
would levy a uniform percentage tariff (perhaps 2 percent) on all imports from nonparticipants.
This mechanism has the advantage of simplicity and transparency, although it
does not relate the tariff specifically to the carbon content o
