Figure 18 shows the response of the consumption levels of the two types of households.
 Consumers who are able to level consumption by adjusting saving have flat
profiles, with no discontinuity at the point when the interest rate is no longer pinned
at too high a level. On the other hand, liquidity-constrained households consume
more when their incomes rise as unemployment drops to normal.
Figure 19 shows the response of investment. Business investment takes a modest
 hit at the outset, then recovers gradually. Investment in houses and consumer
durables falls to zero immediately and does not recover much until the interest rate
is unpinned, when it jumps up to normal levels.
Figure 20 shows the response of the interest rate. For four years, it is pinned at
0.12 percent. At the end of the period of high interest, the rate drops discontinuously
to ?0.20 percent. That is enough, at that time, to restore full employment. The rate
then gradually rises as the adverse forces dissipate.
Figure 21 shows the responses of unemployment to other combinations of adverse
forces. The blue line takes the financial friction out of the mix. The initial increase
in unemployment is not as severe, but the recovery is not as fast. Taking tight credit
out as well isolates the effect of the bulge of housing and durables, which by itself
pushes unemployment up to about 13 percent.
C. Responses of a Similar Economy without a Pinned Real Interest Rate
What if the economy had been hit by the same adverse forces but the interest rate
was completely free to do its job? Figure 22 shows what the model implies for that
counterfactual. Consumption would start out a bit low, because of the inheritance of
heavy debt burdens on constrained households. Business investment would be above
normal, because resources released from consumption and investment in houses
would flow into business capital. Unemployment would stay at its normal level of
5.5 percent. All this because, as Figure 23 shows, the interest rate would have started