Since 1990, the global poverty line has been set by taking the national poverty lines of a group
of the poorest countries in the world, converting them to international dollars using PPPs from
the ICP, and taking a simple average. Bringing in more countries is arguably an improvement
over using India alone, as in Ahluwalia, Carter, and Chenery (1979), though as these authors
argue, the Indian line has been continually debated in a way that is not the case for many other
countries in the average. Either way, the aim is to find a line that represents absolute poverty,
and the idea is that poverty lines in the poorest countries are a reasonable estimate of what that
might be. This idea is further supported by the relationship between the PPP value of national
poverty lines and the PPP value of per capita GDP or consumption; national poverty lines do not
vary much with levels of living in the poorest countries, but beyond some cutoff?where relative
poverty begins to matter as well as absolute poverty?national poverty lines rise with the aver
age level of living; see Ravallion, Gaurav Datt, and Dominique van de Walle (1991), Ravallion
(1992) and Atkinson and Bourguignon (2000). This relationship is shown in Figure 2, using
data on poverty lines and per capita expenditure levels (from household surveys), assembled by
Ravallion, Chen, and Prem Sangraula (2009), who use them to define the current $1.25 a day
poverty line. Their procedure is to define a cutoff, shown as the line AA in Figure 2, below which
poverty lines do not decline further, and to compute the global line as the simple average of the
poverty lines to the left of A A?which are the poverty lines for the first 15 countries listed in
Table 2. This leads to $1.25 per person per day in 2005 international dollars.
Until the most recent revision, the 1990 line was updated using the same group of reference
countries, so that revisions to the global line, for example from $1.01 to $1.08 in Table 1, came
entirely from revisions in the ICP, from the 1985 benchmark to the 1993 benchmark. In the latest
revision, Ravallion, Chen, and Sangraula collected an important new data set of national poverty
lines, updated not only the conversion factors from the 2005 revision of the ICP, but also the
group of reference countries whose poverty lines go into the global line. One consequence of
the change was that India's recent economic growth allowed it to graduate from the poverty-line
reference group, so that India's poverty line no longer contributes to the global line. This updat
ing has unfortunate and unintended consequences.  B. Setting the Global Poverty Line