The aggregate consumption data have mistreated (5) and the Euler equation
(6) 1 - ^mt+l(xt+l)RJJ+l(xt+l)f(xt+l\x') dxt+l.
One reaction has been to retain the rational expectations assumption but to add backward
looking (see John Y. Campbell and John H. Cochrane 1999) or forward-looking (see Larry G.
Epstein and Stanley E. Zin 1989) contributions to time t felicity. Another reaction has been to
let disparate beliefs contribute to the stochastic discount factor. Hansen and Ravi Jagannathan
(1991) treated the stochastic discount factor mt+l as an unknown nonnegative random variable
and deduced what observed returns RJt+\ and restriction (6) imply about the first and second
moments of admissible stochastic discount factors (with incomplete markets, there exist multiple
stochastic discount factors). Their idea was that prior to specifying a particular theory about
the utility function linking m to real variables like consumption, it is useful to characterize the
mean and standard deviation that an empirically successful m must have. This approach leaves
open the possibility that a successful theory of a stochastic discount factor will assign a role to a
fluctuating probability ratio/(jc/+1 |jc')//(*,+1 |*r) ^ 1, even for an economy in which agent / is a
single representative agent. The likelihood ratio/(xf+1 \xf)/f{xt+x |jc') creates a wedge relative to
the Euler equation that has usually been fit in the rational expectations macroeconomic tradition
originating in Hansen and Singleton (1983) and Rajnish Mehra and Prescott (1985). Likelihood
ratio wedge approaches have been investigated by Peter Bossaerts (2002, 2004), Hansen (2007),
Hansen and Sargent (2007), and Timothy Cogley and Sargent (2007), among others. The art
in Hansen (2007) is to extend rational expectations enough to understand the data better while
retaining the econometric discipline that rational expectations models acquire by economizing
on free parameters that characterize agents' beliefs.12
D. Another Empirical Reason to Allow for Belief Heterogeneity
Applied macroeconomists study data that can be weakly informative about parameters and
model features. Ultimately, this is why differences of opinion about how an economy works can
persist. The philosophy of Evan W. Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), Hansen (2007), and
Hansen and Sargent (2007) is to let agents inside a model have views that can diverge from the
truth in ways about which the data speak quietly and slowly.
III. Rational Expectations Econometrics
Ideas from rational expectations econometrics motivate stories and models that feature gaps
between an objective distribution and the temporary subjective distributions used by a govern?
ment that solves a sequence of intelligent design problems. I review econometric methods that
allow an outsider to learn about a rational expectations equilibrium and introduce some objects
and possibilities that are in play in models containing agents who are learning an equilibrium.
A rational expectations equilibrium is a joint probability density/(jcr|0o) over histories x*
indexed by free parameters 0OG0 that describe preferences, technologies, endowments, and
information. For reasons that will become clear, I have called the parameter vector 0 rather than
p as in Section I. Rational expectations econometrics tells an econometrician who is outside
the model how to learn 6. The econometrician knows only a parametric form for the model and
therefore initially knows less about the equilibrium joint probability distribution than nature and