and Williams (2003); see also Bauer and Rudebusch (2017). All of these estimates
are in the  2–3 percent range in nominal terms. 24
On the other hand, Kiley (2019) has recently argued that, when global factors
are taken into account, the best estimate of the real neutral rate in the United States
might be much lower than the current consensus, perhaps as low as −1 percent,
implying a nominal neutral rate in the range of 1 percent. Although Kiley’s estimate
is an outlier, it does underline the uncertainty around all estimates of the neutral rate.
One current source of uncertainty is the difficulty in determining whether the sharp
reductions in global interest rates in the wake of the financial crisis and the Great
Recession imply corresponding permanent—indeed, ongoing—declines in neutral
rates. Since the usual arguments hold that   r   ∗   is determined primarily by  slow-moving
forces like demography and technology, it is possible that the estimates by Kiley
and others are taking too much signal from recent developments, which may reflect
persistent but ultimately fading  after-effects of the crisis as well as of shortfalls in
aggregate demand in some major foreign economies. On the other hand, perhaps the
overheated financial conditions before the crisis kept rates artificially high, and the
recent downward trend in the neutral rate will continue.
If the nominal neutral rate in the United States does ultimately prove to be as
low as 1 percent, as Kiley finds, then moving that rate higher—to provide more
monetary policy space, and perhaps for other reasons including reducing financial
stability risks—will be an important goal of public policy. In that situation, the case
for a moderate rise in the inflation target would certainly be stronger, notwithstand-
ing the associated costs. That step seems premature as of this writing. However, a
cautious approach could include making plans to increase the countercyclicality of
fiscal policy, for example, by increasing the use of automatic stabilizers. And cer -
tainly, whatever the levels of the neutral rate, it is essential that the Fed keep infla-
tion expectations near target, defending against inflation shortfalls as vigorously as
it defended against  too-high inflation in the past.
My simulation results apply only to the United States and cannot be directly
extended to other countries. Two conclusions of this lecture can safely be extended,
however: that the new monetary tools are effective and should remain in the policy
toolbox; and that the ability of those tools to overcome the (possibly negative) lower
bound on rates is greater, the higher the nominal neutral rate in the jurisdiction in
question. In that respect, it is interesting that (other than Kiley 2019), many cur -
rent estimates place the real neutral rate in major foreign economies above zero.
For example, the New York Fed reports estimates (based on Holston, Laubach, and
Williams 2017) of the real neutral rates of Canada, the euro area, and the United
Kingdom of 1.6, 0.2, and 1.4 percent, respectively. Using the methods of Laubach
and Williams (2003) as well as a DSGE model, Okazaki and Sudo (2018) esti-
mate the real neutral rate in Japan to be close to 1.0 percent. Estimates by Davis,
Fuenzalida, and Taylor (2019) of the real neutral rate in six advanced economies
range between roughly zero and modestly positive. If the real neutral rate is zero or
above, and with most countries targeting inflation around 2 percent, then  shor