The factor x appears because of the implicit assumption that incremental capital suffers
the same utilization rate as existing capital. The presence of that factor implies
that a decline in capital utilization will lower the return to capital unless accompanied
by an increase in employment. A model incorporating the assumption that
incremental capital is only partly utilized is completely unpromising in delivering
an equilibrium when high-yielding currency is available.
Under the alternative assumption that investment occurs only when full utilization
is expected, the marginal product of fully utilized capital as an increment to a
partially utilized stock is
In this case, if the decline in capital utilization is proportionally greater than the
decline in labor utilization, so n/(xk) rises, the return to capital can increase even
though the economy has entered a slump, with low utilization of both factors,
even without a decline in k.
My discussion so far assumes costless adjustment of the capital stock. Under the
more realistic assumption of positive adjustment costs, the return to capital differs
from the marginal product of capital. In the case of costs that increase smoothly
with the magnitude of the adjustment, Tobin's q model applies; q is the market
value of installed capital. The return to capital is the marginal product of capital
plus the capital gain in its market value. But it turns out that the insights from the
simple case of no adjustment cost carry over reasonably accurately to the more
complicated case of positive adjustment costs.
The effect of adjustment costs is to cut the immediate response of the capital stock
to shocks and to spread the effect over time. With adjustment costs, the decline in
installed capital that would raise the return to capital happens slowly. But another
factor replaces the quantity adjustment. Tobin's q falls discontinuously when a negative
shock occurs. From that time on, q rises back to normal, resulting in capital
gains on installed capital.
Now I'll move to a more complete model that builds around this picture of
intertemporal equilibrium. It looks into the indefinite future. It's basically a
Solow growth model in terms of technology, but has life-cycle consumption for
some households. Like the Solow model, it has inelastic labor supply. It permits
unemployment along the lines I just discussed and capital utilization is proportional
to employment, so capital can be unemployed too. The model incorporates
the stock of houses and consumer durables as well as business capital, with
adjustment cost for both kinds of capital. The Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides
model governs the labor market. Some households are liquidity-constrained and
have debt service commitments. Financial friction drives a wedge between the
(17)
F. Role of Adjustment Costs
VIII. Long-Horizon Fully Specified Dynamic Model