Interestingly, in most cases the ratio increases again when individuals are in their
forties (for the most recent of the cohorts to be old enough to be in that age bracket).
Why it increases is beyond the scope of the present work. It would appear to be less
a function of selection since in most cases the women who left would be drawn dis-
proportionately from the lower part of the earnings distribution and those returning
would presumably be the same individuals with less accumulated human capital. If
anything, the function should increase and then decrease.
The main conclusion from the aggregate earnings gender gaps is that the differ-
ence in earnings by sex greatly increases during the first several decades of working
life. That conclusion will be reaffirmed by the findings of studies of several highly
specific occupations for which the training for both men and women is identical.
The two degrees are MBA and JD. The data for these occupations, moreover, is lon-
gitudinal (or retrospective) thereby containing actual cohorts, not synthetic ones. In
addition, the data contains detailed productivity-related characteristics.
B. By Occupation
Within versus Between Occupation Differences by Gender. - Another impor-
tant clue concerning what the last chapter must contain arises from the fact that
the majority of the current earnings gap comes from within occupation differ-
ences in earnings rather than from between occupation differences. What hap-
pens within each occupation is far more important than the occupations in which
women wind up.
The fact can be demonstrated several ways. One is by observing the coefficient on
female in a log earnings regression when a full set of three-digit occupation dum-
mies are added. Table 1 gives the results for four samples from the 2009 to 2011
ACS: two for all education groups and two limited to college (BA) graduates. For
each of these samples, one version is for all workers and one is for those working
full-time, full-year. All regressions include age as a quartic, race, and year. Measures
of time worked (log hours, log weeks) and education levels (above college for the
college graduates) are successively added. Occupation dummies (three-digit level)
are included in the most complete specification.
Absorbing the effect of all occupations decreases the coefficient on female by
no more than one-third. Take the case of college graduates working full-time, full-
year ("full-time, BA"). The female coefficient is -0.285 (a ratio of 0.752) with
no additional variables. Adding log hours and log weeks reduces the coefficient to
-0.230 (0.795). Absorbing all occupations reduces the coefficient on female to
-0.163 (0.850), or almost 30 percent of the distance to equality. In the case of all
education groups, the inclusion of all occupations decreases the gap by somewhat
less. For the full-time, full-year sample that includes the education variables, the gap
decreases from -0.247 (0.781) to -0.192 (0.825) or by just 22 percent.
Another way to measure the effect of occupation is to ask what would happen to
the aggregate gender gap if one equalized earnings by gender within each occupa-
tion or, instead, evened their proportions for each occupation. The answer is that
equalizing earnings within each occupation matters far more than equalizing the
proportions by each occupation. The precise results of the exercise will depend on
the 