SEC to verify Merrill's solvency" (257).3 Perhaps the right balance is to be found in the Russian
proverb that Ronald Reagan repeatedly quoted, much to Mikhail Gorbachev's annoyance: "Trust,
but verify" (floeepnu, ho npoeepn?).

To repeat and emphasize, governmental and private institutions of governance coexist even in
modern market economies. Conversely, many economic transactions take place outside conventional
markets, e.g., within families, social networks, and firms. Therefore, the issue in the study
of different governance institutions is not the old-style contrast: "market versus government."
Rather, it is the interaction of the whole system of governance and transactions?what combinations
work well, under what conditions. In this study, a general principle will appear throughout:
no institution or system will prove perfect or ideal?the economist's first-best?under all circumstances.
Everything is "second-best" at best, subject to numerous constraints of information,
incentives, commitment, and rules of the political game.

II. Alternative Institutions

What kinds of alternative governance institutions should we study in this context? Different
distinctions are appropriate for different purposes. For my purpose here, the most relevant distinction
is between formal institutions of the state, enforced by its legal apparatus and using its
powers of coercion if needed as a last resort, and informal social institutions, which must be self
governing using strategies available to the participants in the economic interaction themselves.4
I will interpret both categories in a broad and inclusive manner.

My list of formal governmental institutions of governance starts with the constitution (written
or merely widely understood) that lays down the rules of the political game, the legislature
that makes more detailed rules within this context, and the courts, the police, and licensing and
regulatory agencies that interpret and enforce these rules. Informal private and social institutions
include networks that facilitate search and information, the norms of behavior, and sanctions
for enforcement against violations of norms. There can be private arrangements, whether social
organizations (both for-profit and non-profit), or other norms that stipulate individual actions for
adjudication and enforcement of the norms. And private order can include internalization of the
transaction by placing the parties into one economic unit, in other words, by integration that converts
the problem from one of enforcement of an arm's-length contract into an agency problem
in corporate governance.

III. Protection of Property Rights

If the government does not protect private property rights, at least not as well as the owners
require, many alternative private arrangements arise to meet the owners' needs. Some work
by deterrence: private guards and gated communities exist in many rich societies, especially if
the rich are an enclave surrounded by substantially poorer people. Some attempt a mixture of
deterrence and private punishment of violators. Indeed, this was the origin of the Sicilian mafia
(Oriana Bandiera 2003; Diego Gambetta 1993, chap. 4). After the feudal system in Sicily had
collapsed, but before the modern Italian state had emerged, banditry was rife. Landowners (especially
the absentee landlords) started hiring the toughest of the bandits as guards to protect their