There is a broader point to make. For lots of reasons we might expect that financial
markets are the most efficient of all markets. They are the only markets where
it is generally possible to cheaply sell short, an essential feature if we expect prices
to be "right." Yet if financial markets can be off by a factor of two, how much confidence
should we have that prices in other markets are good measures of value,

where there are no realistic arbitrage opportunitiesTo

give just one example, consider labor markets. There has been considerable

attention paid in recent years to the growing inequality in incomes and wealth
around the world (Piketty 2014; Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2011). Although there
has been much debate about the cause of this trend, most of the discussion within
economics is based on the presumption that differences in income reflect differences
in productivity. Is that presumption warranted? If stock prices can be off by a factor
of two, might not that be true for workers, from hamburger flippers to CEOsThere
is reason for skepticism about that presumption from the bottom to the

top of the income ladder. At the lower end of the wage distribution there has been
a long literature begun by Slichter (1950) documenting odd inter-industry wage
differentials. Simply put, some industries pay more than others, and this applies to
clerical workers and janitors as well as higher paid executives. Important papers by
Krueger and Summers (1988) and Dickens and Katz (1986) reignited this literature
summarized in Thaler (1989). Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) have recently documented
similar findings in Germany using panel data that allow for individual fixed
effects. They find that when workers move from a bottom quartile paying industry
to a top quartile industry their wages jump, and the opposite thing happens when
workers move from a high paying industry to a low one. It seems implausible that
these workers become significantly more or less productive simply by changing
industries.

At the other end of the spectrum, the ratio of CEO pay to that of the average
worker has skyrocketed in the past few decades. In 1965 for large firms based in the
United States this ratio was 20; by 2014 it was over 300, more than twice the ratio
in any other country (Mishel and Davis 2015). Of course some economists argue
that this rise simply reflects the growing productivity of the CEOs (e.g., Kaplan,
Klebanov, and Sorensen 2012) but how confident should we be in this assessmentCEO
pay is usually set by the compensation committees of boards of directors that
rely on consultants who base their recommendations in part on the pay of other
CEOs. This kind of recursive, self-fulfilling process is not one that generates high
confidence that pay and performance are highly correlated. Of course there is no
way to settle this argument. Rather, I just want to repeat my question. If stock prices
can be off by a factor of two, why should we be confident that other markets do not
diverge by that much, or moreIV.

One Theory, Two Tasks

The conclusion I reach from research in behavioral finance is that even these most
efficient of markets often lead to empirical results that are inconsistent with theories
based on rational investors making choices in markets with tiny transaction costs. In
other words, the results we obtain are not consistent with the hypothesis that investors
behave "as if' they were rational. And there should be even greater s
