prediction made by the traditional model, namely that there is a set of factors that
will have no effect on economic behavior. I refer to these as supposedly irrelevant
factors or SIFs. Contrary to the predictions of traditional theory, SIFs matter; in
fact, in some situations the single most important determinant of behavior is a SIF.
Finally, I turn to the future. Spoiler alert: I predict that behavioral economics will
eventually disappear.
I. The Historical Roots of Behavioral Economics
As Simon (1987, p. 612) noted, the term "behavioral economics" is a bit odd. "The
phrase 'behavioral economics' appears to be a pleonasm. What 'non-behavioral'
economics can we contrast with it? The answer to this question is found in the
specific assumptions about human behavior that are made in neoclassical eco-
nomic theory." These assumptions are familiar to all students of economic theory.
(i) Agents have well-defined preferences and unbiased beliefs and expectations.
(ii) They make optimal choices based on these beliefs and preferences. This in turn
implies that agents have infinite cognitive abilities (or, put another way, are as smart
as the smartest economist) and infinite willpower since they choose what is best,
not what is momentarily tempting, (iii) Although they may act altruistically, espe-
cially toward close friends and family, their primary motivation is self-interest. It is
these assumptions that define Homo economicus, or as I like to call them, Econs.
Behavioral economics simply replaces Econs with Homo sapiens, otherwise known
as Humans.
To many economists these assumptions, along with the concept of "equilibrium,"
effectively define their discipline; that is, they study Econs in an abstract economy
rather than Humans in the real one. But such was not always the case. Indeed, Ashraf,
Camerer, and Loewenstein (2005) convincingly document that Adam Smith, often
considered the founder of economics as a discipline, was a bona fide behavioral
economist. Consider just three of the most important concepts of behavioral eco-
nomics: overconfidence, loss aversion, and self-control. On overconfidence Smith
(1776, p. 1) commented on "the over-weening conceit which the greater part of men
have of their own abilities" that leads them to overestimate their chance of success.
On the concept of loss aversion Smith (1759, p. 176-177) noted that "Pain ... is,
in almost all cases, a more pungent sensation than the opposite and correspondent
pleasure." As for self-control, and what we now call "present bias," Smith (1759, p.
273) had this to say: "The pleasure which we are to enjoy ten years hence, interests
us so little in comparison with that which we may enjoy today." George Stigler was
fond of saying that there was nothing new in economics, it had all been said by
Adam Smith. It turns out that was true for behavioral economics as well.
But Adam Smith was far from the only early economist who had good intuitions
about human behavior. Many who followed Smith, shared his views about time dis-
counting. For example, Pigou (1920, p. 21) famously wrote that "Our telescopic fac-
ulty is defective and ... we therefore see future pleasures, as it were, on a diminished
scale." Similarly Fisher (1930, p. 82), who offered the first truly modern economic
theory of intertemporal choice, did not think it was a good description of behavior.
He offered many colorful stories to support this skepticism: "This is illustrated by the
story of the farmer who would never mend his leaky roof. When it rained, he