stop the leak, and when it did not rain, there was no leak to be stopped!" Keynes (1936,
p. 154) anticipated much of what is now called behavioral finance in the General
Theory. For example, he observed that "Day-to-day fluctuations in the profits of existing
investments, which are obviously of an ephemeral and non-significant character,
tend to have an altogether excessive, and even absurd, influence on the market."
Many economists even thought that psychology (then still in its infancy) should
play an important role in economics. Pareto (1906, p. 21) wrote that "The foundation
of political economy, and, in general of every social science, is evidently psychology.
A day may come when we shall be able to decide the laws of social science

from the principles of psychology." John Maurice Clark (1918, p. 4), the son of John
Bates Clark, went further. "The economist may attempt to ignore psychology, but it
is sheer impossibility for him to ignore human nature ... If the economist borrows
his conception of man from the psychologist, his constructive work may have some
chance of remaining purely economic in character. But if he does not, he will not
thereby avoid psychology. Rather, he will force himself to make his own, and it will
be bad psychology."

It has been nearly 100 years since Clark wrote those words but they still ring
true, and behavioral economists have been taking Clark's advice, which is to borrow
some good psychology rather than invent bad psychology. Why did this common
sense suggestion fail to gain much traction for so longII.

Explainawaytions

In the process of making economics more mathematically rigorous after World
War II, the economics profession appears to have lost its good intuition about human
behavior. Defective telescopic facilities were replaced with time-consistent exponential
discounting. Over-weening conceits were replaced by rational expectations.

And ephemeral shifts in animal spirits were replaced by the efficient market hypothesis.
Economics textbooks no longer had any Humans. How did this happenI

believe that the most plausible explanation is that models of rational behavior
became standard because they were the easiest to solve. This conjecture is not meant
as a put-down. One begins learning physics by studying the behavior of objects in
a vacuum; atmosphere can be added later. But physicists never denied the existence
or importance of air; instead they worked harder and built more complicated models.
For many years, economists reacted to questions about the realism of the basic
model by doing the equivalent of either denying the existence of air, or by claiming
that it just didn't matter all that much. Matthew Rabin has dubbed these defensive
reactions as "explainawaytions."1

Let's be blunt. The model of human behavior based on the premise that people
optimize is and has always been highly implausible. For one thing, the model does
not take into consideration the degree of difficulty of the problem that agents are
assumed to be "solving." Consider two games: tic-tac-toe and chess. A reasonably
bright first grader can learn to play the optimal strategy in tic-tac-toe, and so a
model that assumes players choose optimally in this game will be a
