But I have gotten ahead of myself. Let us first look at the evolution of gender gaps
in earnings over the life-cycle and differences by occupation. These hold clues to
what must be in the last chapter for it to be the finale of the grand gender convergence.
A. In the Aggregate and over the Life-Cycle
The ratio of (mean) annual earnings between male and female workers (full-time,
full-year, 25 to 69 years) was 0.72 in 2010 and that of the medians was 0.77. The
ratio of the medians for the same group was 0.74 in 2000 but 0.56 in 1980. 15 These
aggregate ratios have been somewhat sticky for the last ten years or so after greatly
increasing in the preceding decades, especially in the 1980s. The same is true looking
only at college graduates, for whom the ratios are lower - 0.65 in 2010 for the
means and 0.72 for the medians, about the same as it was in 2000. Interestingly,
across the past decade the gender pay gap has narrowed within almost all age groups
even though the aggregate has not budged as much. How can that beThe
answer concerns what happens to the gender gap over the life-cycle. The
ratio of female to male earnings greatly decreases for some time as cohorts age. It
is lower for individuals in their forties compared with the same individuals in their
twenties. And because the baby boom is still working its way through the population,
the aggregate ratio can be fairly stable even though the underlying components
are actually increasing.
One way to see change in the earnings gender gap by age is to construct synthetic
birth cohorts, as shown in Figure 1, part A for college graduate men and
women working full-time, full-year and in Figure 1, part B for college graduates
with controls for hours, weeks, and further education.16 The data used are from the
US Census and the American Community Survey (ACS) for the years from 1970
to 2010.
The most obvious and important findings from these depictions are that each
cohort has a higher ratio of female to male earnings than the preceding one and that
the ratio is closer to parity for younger individuals than it is for older individuals, at
least up to some age. One part of the story of the preceding metaphorical chapters is
that there have been large gains in the earnings of women relative to men. An important
clue to what it will take to create gender equality in earnings is that something
happens that decreases women's earnings relative to those of men as they age.
Men and women begin their employment with earnings that are fairly similar,
both for full-time year-round workers and for all workers with controls for hours and
weeks. In the case of the latter group, relative earnings are in the 90 percent range
for the most recent cohorts even without any other controls. But these ratios soon
decline and in some cases plummet to below the 70 percen