the range of common targets, as discussed above. The tariff rates range from 0 percent
(no penalty) to 10 percent in steps of 1 percent. The upper end is chosen as one that
would begin to place a serious burden on both the trade and the enforcement systems.
For each of the calculations, I started with a base set of participants and then used
the evolutionary algorithm to find a stable coalition (if one exists), with multiple
restarts and two different platforms to test stability. The results were sensible in all
cases and will be discussed below. This paper presents the results primarily in graph-
ical form. The numbers underlying the figures are contained in the online Appendix.
C. Results for Stability and Participation
The first remarkable result is that virtually every regime produces a stable coa-
lition. (There are 6 unstable regimes out of 44. Results for these are averages of
quasi-stable coalitions as explained below.) From a theoretical point of view, there is
no obvious reason why the nonlinearities of participation would not lead to multiple
quasi-stable coalitions. The intuition is that the trade sanctions are powerful enough
to push countries into nonparticipation or participation.
The second question is whether the penalty structure is sufficient to induce par-
ticipation. In other words, how many of the 15 regions participate in the Climate
Club? Figure 3 shows the number of participating regions for different tariff rates
and different target carbon prices. The bars are arrayed from left to right by increas-
ing tariff rates.
The results are straightforward. No country joins the Climate Club without trade
sanctions (i.e., at a zero tariff rate). This key result confirms theory and observation.
For low target carbon prices, all or most countries join even for very low tariff rates.
For target carbon prices of $50 and $100 per ton, high penalty tariffs are required
to induce participation. With a $100 per ton target, full participation is not attained
even with the highest tested tariff rates. The participation rate rises monotonically
with the penalty tariff rate.
D. Results for Actual Carbon Prices and Abatement
The next question is the success of different arrangements in inducing abatement.
Figure 4 shows the level of the globally averaged carbon price for different regimes.
The results here are similar to those for participation but in effect weight the results
by region size.
For target carbon prices of $12.5 and $25, the treaty attains the goal of having the
global carbon price equal the target price (which is equal to the global SCC) even
at low tariff rates. For a $50 target carbon price, the target carbon price is almost
reached with a 5 percent tariff.
For a carbon price target of $100, the regime achieves no gain over a regime with
a target price of $50 until the highest tariff rate. Indeed, at medium tariff rates, we
see a Laffer-curve result as the actual global carbon price is lower with the $100
target than with the $50 target. The reason is that abatement is so costly in the $100
regime that most countries choose to accept the trade penalties. This then leads to
a low participation rate and a low actual penalty on nonparticipants because so few
countries are in t