Just as legal markets require social support to thrive, laws banning markets require
social support to have a good chance to be effective. In the United States, marijuana
is still a banned Schedule I drug under Federal law.82 But after a long history as a
popular illegal drug, 30 states and Washington, DC have legalized marijuana in some forms and for at least some uses, and legalization has proceeded in other countries as well.
83 And just as small marketplaces have to accommodate themselves to large
markets, small banned markets are influenced by adjacent legal
mark
etplaces.84 For
example, as of this writing, marijuana remains banned in Idaho, which shares borders
with three states (Washington, Oregon, and Nevada) in which marijuana is
legal for recreational use, and three more (Utah, Wyoming, and Montana) in which some uses of marijuana are legal. I anticipate that enforcement of Idaho’s ban will become more difficult.
85 There are indications that legalization has resulted in harm
reduction: it appears that competition from legal suppliers of marijuana has reduced violent crime in the United States connected with imports of marijuana by criminal organizations in Mexico (Gavrilova, Kamada, and Zoutman forthcoming).
Among the oldest repugnant markets are markets for sex.
86 Prostitution is called
the oldest profession,87 and there is a long history of largely failed attempts to eliminate
it. In many countries prostitution (the selling of sex) is a criminal offense. In Iceland, Norway, and Sweden the purchase of sex has lately been criminalized while the sale has been decriminalized, and in many countries the participation of third
parties (“pimps” or brothels) is outlawed even when the purchase and sale of sex is
legal in at least some venues.
88 In the United States, prostitution is widely illegal,
from sites that are not themselves fully legal; see, e.g., Kral and Davidson (2017) on an “Unsanctioned Supervised
Injection Site in the US.” But see Massachusetts Medical Society (2017) for a proposal to set up a pilot program in the United States. Opponents argue that harm reduction may make drug use more socially acceptable and wide-spread, or even that reducing the risk of death and disease may lessen the disincentives and lead to a growth of addictio