was articulated by Friedman (1999, p. 239) in his bestselling The Lexus and the
Olive Tree: "Every once in a while when I am traveling abroad, I need to indulge
in a burger and a bag of McDonald's French fries. For all I know I have eaten
McDonald's burgers and fries in more countries of the world than anyone, and I can
testify that they all really do taste the same" (italics in the original).7
A. Data Collection
There is a reason that McDonald's products are similar. These restaurants oper
ate with a standardized protocol for employee work. Food ingredients are deliv
ered to the restaurants and stored in coolers and freezers. The ingredients and food
preparation system are specifically designed to differ very little from place to place.
Although the skills necessary to handle contracts with suppliers or to manage and
select employees may differ among restaurants, the basic food preparation work in
each restaurant is highly standardized. Operations are monitored using the 600-page
Operations and Training Manual, which covers every aspect of food preparation
and includes precise timetables as well as color photographs.8
A key motivation for the use of standardized work protocols is the implied guar
antee of food safety that eating at a McDonald's restaurant provides when a traveler
has little information about the quality of local establishments. The standardized
McDonald's brand is both a risk (in case of some failure) and a reward (when fail
ure is rare). As a result of the standardization of both the product and the workers'
tasks, international comparisons of wages of McDonald's crew members are free of
interpretation problems stemming from differences in skill content or compensat
ing wage differentials. I suspect there are other internationally diversified compa
nies that have a similar structure and that might also make suitable candidates for
data collection.
My original survey of McDonald's wages was carried out as a pilot project with
the cooperation of the McKinsey Global Institute. To determine if the project was
feasible, data were collected in the month of December 1998 for a limited list of
13 countries.9 Since the data collection went quite smoothly, the primary project
was started with the collection of data for 27 countries during the summer of 2000,
specifically including a number of transitional and developing countries.
In general, the data collection was for McDonald's restaurants operating in a
large urban area, typically a capital city or, in larger countries, the two largest
cities. In later work, starting in 2007, data were collected for this project with a
business intelligence firm. For larger countries, data were collected in multiple
locations, stratified by city size. In most cases, wage rates are simply hourly pay,
without any adjustment for benefits or taxes. In some cases the data indicated a