American Economic Review 2020, 110(4): 943–983  
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.110.4.943
943* Brookings Institution (email: bbernanke@brookings.edu). AEA Presidential Lecture, given in January 2020.  
I thank Sage Belz, Michael Ng, and Finn Schüle for outstanding research assistance and many colleagues for useful 
comments. This lecture is dedicated to the memory of Paul V olcker.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.110.4.943 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.The New Tools of Monetary Policy†
By Ben S. Bernanke*
To overcome the limits on traditional monetary policy imposed by the 
effective lower bound on  short-term interest rates, in recent years the 
Federal Reserve and other  advanced-economy central banks have 
deployed new policy tools. This lecture reviews what we know about 
the new monetary tools, focusing on quantitative easing (QE) and 
forward guidance, the principal new tools used by the Fed. I argue 
that the new tools have proven effective at easing financial condi-
tions when policy rates are constrained by the lower bound, even 
when financial markets are functioning normally, and that they can 
be made even more effective in the future. Accordingly, the new tools 
should become part of the standard central bank toolkit. Simulations 
of the Fed’s FRB/US model suggest that, if the nominal neutral inter -
est rate is in the range of  2–3 percent, consistent with most estimates 
for the United States, then a combination of QE and forward guid-
ance can provide the equivalent of roughly 3 percentage points of 
policy space, largely offsetting the effects of the lower bound. If the 
neutral rate is much lower, however, then overcoming the effects of 
the lower bound may require additional measures, such as a moder -
ate increase in the inflation target or greater reliance on fiscal policy 
for economic stabilization. (JEL D78, E31, E43, E52, E58, E62)
In the last decades of the twentieth century, US monetary policy wrestled 
with the problem of high and erratic inflation. That fight, led by Federal Reserve 
chairs Paul V olcker and Alan Greenspan, succeeded. The result—low inflation and 
 well-anchored inflation expectations—provided critical support for economic sta-
bility and growth in the 1980s and 1990s, in part by giving monetary policymakers 
more scope to respond to  short-term fluctuations in employment and output without 
having to worry about stoking high inflation.
However, with the advent of the new century, it became clear that low inflation 
was not an unalloyed good. In combination with historically low real interest rates—
the result of demographic, technological, and other forces that raised desired global 
saving relative to desired investment—low inflation (actual and expected) has trans-
lated into persistently low nominal interest rates, at both the long and short ends of 