bound. For example, for   r   ∗   = 1, the combination of a 2 percent inflation threshold
for forward guidance and the QE(C) program produces a lower average loss than
the baseline policy with a 5 percent inflation target; and the same forward guidance
combined with QE(D) implies a lower loss than even the unconstrained baseline
policy. For   r   ∗   = 0, the combination of a 2 percent inflation threshold and the QE(D)
policy yields a lower loss than the baseline policy with a 5 percent inflation target,
and an only slightly greater loss than that of the (hypothetical) unconstrained baseline
policy. None of these combination policies implies unreasonably high average
durations of  lower-bound episodes or peak asset  central-bank accumulations
outside historical experience. In contrast to the baseline rules, these policies also
produce inflation rates near target, consistent with inflation expectations remaining
well anchored.
The finding that, with an inflation target of 2 percent, a plausible combination of
new policy tools performs as well as traditional policies with an effective inflation
target of 5 percent, yields two implications. First, it suggests that, when the nominal
neutral rate is in the range of  2–3 percent, the new monetary tools are capable
of adding about 3 percentage points worth of policy space, relative to traditional
policies. That is, when the nominal neutral rate is in the range of  2–3 percent, the
use of the new tools allows policymakers to achieve economic outcomes similar to
those that could be attained by traditional policies if the nominal neutral rate were
3 percentage points higher, which in turn are close to the outcomes traditional policies
could achieve in the absence of any constraint on  short-term rates. Second, the
finding significantly weakens the argument for raising the inflation target to create
more policy space. Unless the direct costs of low nominal interest rates, in terms
of increased financial stability risks for example, exceed the costs of reaching and
maintaining 5 percent inflation, the use of new policy tools is preferable to a higher
inflation target.
Obviously, there are qualifications. Tables 3 and 4 include no standard errors, but
in reality, the uncertainty surrounding the reported estimates is high. Reasonable
people can disagree about the precise effects of asset purchases on financial conditions,
the credibility of forward guidance, or the effects of changes in financial
conditions on growth and inflation. And whatever its strengths, FRB/US is just one,
imperfect model of the US economy. On the other hand, the reported simulations
may in some ways understate the potential of new monetary tools. For example, I
have ruled out the use of negative  short-term rates,  funding-for-lending programs,
and other tools that might provide additional policy space. I have also excluded
MBS purchases, which could reduce the spread between mortgage rates and
Treasury yields. A policy framework that made inflation thresholds a condition for
raising rates from the lower bound, if it led market participants to expect that policy
response even in advance of rates hitting the bound, would be more powerful than
the  threshold-based guidance in the simulations. And FRB/US does not include all
of the new tools’ potential channels of effect, such as the possible impacts of asset
purchases on bank lending (Rodnyansky and Darmouni 2017).
The Role of the Neutral Interest Rate:  An especially important qualification to
my results is the uncertainty about the level of the neutral interest rate. As I have discussed,
if the nominal neutral rate is in the range of  2–3 percent or higher,