973
BERNANKE: THE NEW TOOLS OF MONETARY POLICY VOL. 110 NO. 4
economy at the lower bound 56 percent of the time. These results, which are similar 
to those of Kiley and Roberts (2017), are if anything too favorable to the baseline 
rules, since they assume that inflation expectations remain at target. If expectations 
fall in response to persistently  below-target inflation, as no doubt they ultimately 
would, then the nominal neutral interest rate would decline, reducing policy space 
yet further.
Second, higher inflation targets, which for these simulations I assume to result 
 one-for-one in higher nominal neutral rates, improve the performance of the base-
line rules, by increasing policy space and making encounters with the lower bound 
less frequent. For example, with   r   ∗   = 1 (Table 3), an inflation target of 5 percent 
would result (by assumption) in a neutral nominal rate   i   ∗   = 6. In this case, accord-
ing to these simulations, the lower bound would bind less than 2 percent of the 
time, and the mean loss associated with the baseline rule would be close to the fully 
unconstrained case, illustrating the increased policy space. Importantly, though, the 
losses calculated here ignore the costs of having a permanently higher inflation rate, 
as well as the costs of the transition to a higher inflation target, both of which likely 
would be significant.22 Moreover, it may be that raising the inflation target would 
provide less additional space than assumed in these simulations, because at higher 
inflation rates economic behavior could change in ways that reduce the potency of 
monetary policy (L’Huillier and Schoenle 2019).
Third, taken separately, both forward guidance and QE lead to improved perfor -
mance, relative to the baseline rule with a 2 percent inflation target. However, the 
economic benefits of forward guidance alone in these simulations are moderate, and 
less than in much of the literature (e.g., Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts 2019). The 
reduced impact of forward guidance in these simulations appears to be the result 
of my limitation of credible guidance to 28 quarters in the future, which implies 
that this policy is relatively ineffective during long episodes at the lower bound. In 
contrast, QE taken alone appears powerful in these simulations: with   r   ∗   = 1 and  
  i   ∗   = 3 (Table 3), the most aggressive QE program, QE(D), achieves economic out-
comes that are about the same as the baseline rule with a 5 percent inflation target 
(for which   i   ∗   = 6), and that are also relatively close to the unconstrained baseline 
rule, consistent with Kiley (2018). With   r   ∗   = 1, the mean peak stock of central bank 
assets for this policy (over a typical  25-year period) is about $2.6 trillion, a high 
value but not out of the range of recent experience. However, the QE(D) policy 
results in the economy spending about 11 percent of the time at the lower bound, 
compared to 2 percent of the time for the balanced Taylor rule with a 5 percent infla-
tion target. With   r   ∗   = 0 and   i   ∗   = 2 (Table 4), the performance of the QE(D) program 
deteriorates somewhat but remains close to that of the baseline rule with a 5 percent 
inflation target.
Fourth, importantly, for both   r   ∗   = 1 (Table 3) and   r   ∗   = 0 (Table 4), correspond-
ing to nominal neutral rates of 3 percent and 2 percent respectively, combinations of 
QE and forward guidance can almost fully compensate for the effects of the lower 
22 An important transition cost would be the uncertainty and volatility associated with having to  unanchor infla-
tion expectations and  reanchor them at a higher level, which could take a long time and damage the Fed’s credibility. 
Running the economy hot to reach the higher inflation target could have both benefits (including the benefits of a 
“hot” labor market) and costs (such as financial stability risks).