adding event days also adds noise from  nonmonetary news affecting asset prices. A
more direct solution to this identification problem is to try to control for the policy
expectations of market participants, then to observe the effects on asset prices of the
unexpected component of QE announcements.

For traditional monetary policy, based on management of the  short-term interest
rate, fed funds and Eurodollar futures markets provide useful estimates of policy
expectations (Kuttner 2001), but no analogous markets exist for asset purchases
and other nontraditional policies. As an alternative, several researchers have used
surveys and media reports to try to quantify those expectations. For example, in
the European context, De Santis (2019) attempted to estimate the financial market
effects of the ECB’s Asset Purchase Program, its first foray into  large-scale
QE, announced in January 2015. ECB policymakers and media commentary had

strongly foreshadowed the program, so its actual announcement—like the announcement
of later rounds of QE in the United States—had only modest market effects,

with the average ( GDP-weighted)  10-year sovereign debt yield in the euro area
declining by about 10 basis points. To try to control for market expectations of
ECB actions, De Santis counted the number of news stories on Bloomberg that
contained various keywords. From these, he created an index of media and market
attention to QE in Europe. Controlling both for this measure and for macroeconomic
and  country-specific factors, De Santis found that the ECB’s initial QE program
reduced average  10-year sovereign debt yields by 63 basis points over the period
from September 2014 to October 2015. This reduction is economically significant
and, when adjusted for the size of the program, comparable to estimates from event
studies of early QE programs in the United States and the United Kingdom, even
though in early 2015 European financial markets were functioning normally.

A related empirical strategy for measuring the effects of QE relies on the fact that,
even when the size of a QE program was well anticipated, market participants may
have been unsure about the specific assets to be purchased. If the portfolio balance
effect is operating, then news that an unexpectedly large share of the central bank’s
planned purchases will be devoted to a particular asset should raise the price of that
asset relative to others. An impressive literature has been built on this insight.8 For
example, in a careful study, Cahill et al. (2013) used data on  within-day prices on
all outstanding US Treasury securities (excluding  inflation-indexed bonds) for the
period 2008 to 2012. Their goal was to study, over time frames as short as 30 minutes,
not just how QE announcements affected overall yields but how they affected
the relative yields of individual securities. That led them to focus on announcements
about which securities would be targeted for purchase. To measure unexpected shifts
in purchase plans, the authors used the Primary Dealer Survey and other sources.
To illustrate their approach: On November 3, 2010, at 2:15 pm, the FOMC

announced QE2, a plan to purchase $600 billion of Treasury securities. As already
discussed, the program was largely anticipated, and the announcement accordingly
had little effect on Treasury yields overall. However, at the same time as the FOMC
announcement, the New York Fed released information about how it planned to
allocate purchases across Treasury securities of different maturities. This docu