slowed; the significant increases in  longer-term yields and expected  short-term rates
that followed show that signaling effects can be powerful and were not restricted to
the earliest QE announcements. I will return to the role of policy communications.
The evidence described so far suggests that, once we control for the fact that market
participants substantially anticipated later rounds of QE, the impact of asset purchases
did not significantly diminish over time, as financial conditions calmed, or as
the stock of assets held by the central bank grew. That still leaves the second broad
objection to the  event-study evidence, that those studies prove only that announcements
of asset purchases have  short-run effects on asset prices and yields. If the
effects of announcements are quickly reversed, then QE programs would likely be
ineffective in stimulating the economy.
The claim that the effects of QE announcements were mostly transitory, due for
example to pure liquidity effects, is not particularly persuasive on its face. The normal
presumption is that the effects on asset prices identified by event studies should
be largely persistent, even if the event window is relatively short. If that were not
the case—if the effects of asset purchase announcements were predictably temporary—
then smart investors could profit by betting on reversals. Indeed, in a response
to Wright (2011), Neely (2016) showed that time series models that imply reversals
of the effects of QE announcements do not predict asset prices as well out of sample
as the simple assumption that asset prices tomorrow will be the same as today. In
other words, predicting reversals of the effects of asset purchase programs is not
a  money-making strategy, as we should expect. Moreover, Neely (2010), Gagnon
et al. (2011), and many others found that the prices of assets not subject to Fed
purchases—including corporate bonds, equities, the dollar, and a variety of foreign
assets—moved substantially following announcements of asset purchase programs,
and in much the same way as following conventional policy announcements.
QE also appeared to stimulate the global issuance of corporate bonds (Lo Duca,
Nicoletti, and Martinez 2016) and to reduce the cost of insuring against corporate
credit risk via credit default swaps (Gilchrist and Zakrajšek 2013). The  cross-asset
impacts seem inconsistent with the view that the  event-study findings reflect only
asset-specific liquidity effects.10
As noted earlier, proponents of the view that QE had only transient effects sometimes
point out that  longer-term yields did not reliably decline during periods in
which the Fed was executing its announced asset purchases. In part, this pattern can
be explained by the confounding influences on yields of other factors, including fiscal
policy, global conditions, and changes in sentiment. For example, the rise in yields
in the latter part of 2009, during the implementation of QE1, was seen at the Fed not
as a policy failure but rather as an indication that its aggressive monetary policies,
together with other factors such as the Obama administration’s fiscal program and
the successful stress tests of major banks, were increasing public confidence in the
economic outlook. Indeed, judging from the returns to  inflation-protected securities,
much of the increases in  10-year yields during the implementation phases of QE1
and QE2 reflected higher inflation expectations, a desired outcome of the pr