Hart and Mas-Colell and Foster and Rakesh Vohra (1999) show that the source of the difficulty
is that most adaptive schemes specify that adjustments in a player's strategy do not depend
on other players' payoff functions, an uncoupling of the dynamics that in general prevents the
system from converging to a Nash equilibrium. Many examples of the adaptive schemes in the
literature are uncoupled. Because many game theorists find uncoupled schemes desirable, parts
of the literature have lowered the bar by looking for convergence to something weaker than Nash
equilibria, namely, correlated equilibria or coarse correlated equilibria. Hart and Mas-Colell
(2003, 1834) observed that "It is thus interesting that Nash equilibrium, a notion that does not
predicate coordinated behavior, cannot be guaranteed to be reached in an uncoupled way, while
correlated equilibrium, a notion based on coordination, can."45

Hart and Mas-Colell (2000, 2001, 2003) study adaptive schemes that are backward looking.
For example, some of the most interesting ones have a player construct counterfactual historical
payoffs that he would have received had he played other strategies, then compute a measure of
regret, then adjust future play in directions that would have minimized regret. These schemes
impute little or no theorizing and foresight to the players.

For my present purposes, one of the most interesting contributions comes from part of the
literature that attributes more sophistication to players, in particular, the work of Foster and
Young (2003), which is also summarized in Young (2004, ch. 8).46 Their model has the following
components: (1) each player has a large set of potential models that describe his opponents'
strategies; (2) players use a random device to select a particular model; (3) after that model is
selected, there is an "act-and-collect-data" period during which a player (incorrectly) assumes
that he will believe his current model forever; during this period, each player chooses his actions
via a smoothed best response to what his model tells him about opponents' actions (e.g., a quantal
response function); (4) after a data-collection period, a player compares the empirical pattern of
his opponents' play with that predicted by his model. He performs a hypothesis test that compares
the theoretical and empirical distributions. If he rejects his current model, he randomly
draws a new model from his set of models, then returns to step 2. If he accepts the model, he
returns to step 3, waits a random number of periods, and then begins another data-collection
period.

With suitable assumptions about the lengths of testing periods and the tolerances of the hypothesis
tests, Foster and Young (2003) show that behaviors eventually emerge that are often close to
Nash equilibria. Their notion of hypothesis tests is sufficiently broad to include many plausible
procedures. Their convergence result seems to be an uncoupled multi-agent learning scheme that
actually approaches Nash equilibria, not something weaker like the coarse correlated equilibrium
that the entirely backward-looking schemes mentioned above can approach. They avoid the
conundrum of Hart and Mas-Colell partly by weakening the notion of convergence.
B. From Commodity to Fiat Money

A long process led to the ideas in the opening quote from David Ricardo, which in time led
Keynes and others to propose a fiat currency.
