Love of Wealth and the Public Service
21
as it can to refer to examples already given-in bureau-
cratic or colonial administration. Powers of persuasion
must be exercised as well as powers of leadership, and
compromise must be a frequent outcome of differing
opinions. We must face the fact that private industry.
(so long as it continues to be conducted as private in-
dustry on a great scale) will offer some temptations to
the captain of industry which public service can never
equal. On the other hand, public service satisfies the
love of distinction in a manner and for a degree that can
be equalled by no ostentation of wealth and no sense of
secret power. This lodestone will always attract men to
political life; and, given some reasonable chance of pro-
longed tenure and substantial power, it will attract men
of the needed stamp.
The change which we may hope for in the future of
American government must come in the state of mind
of the people as well as in constitutional and statu-
tory enactment. Something may be done without legis-
lation of any sort. Capable officers may be reëlected,
even though the statutes provide that elections shall
occur annually or biennially. Reasonably free sway may
be allowed them in administration, even though alder-
men or councils have the power to restrict or veto. But,
as I have already had occasion to say, legislation and
tradition react on each other. A change of legislation in
the right direction fosters habits in the right direction.
The activity which we see now in improving the frame-
work of municipal government is itself a sign that tradi-
tions are mending. As the remodelled charters come
into effect, they will in turn still further react on the
voter's state of mind. Whether both combined will
eventually bring about conditions under which men of
the needed quality will find a congenial field in the man-
agement of public affairs is, to repeat, a question of popu-
lar intelligence.
But and here we reach the second part of our prob-
lem-it is also in large part a question of character. Are
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
