42
source
-
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
-
and would seem to be strongly suggestive under present
circumstances. It is obvious that an enormous mass of
incomes from investments would now be covered by a
similar provision, and also that the income from coupon
bonds, as to the ownership of which no record exists, is
the most slippery income of all, and the most easily con-
cealed by the reluctant tax-payer. Still, the income from
bonds and other interest on debts- so easily taxed at its
is left by the new act to stand upon the tax-
payer's declaration alone. Another point somewhat dif-
ficult of explanation is the fact that, while the act of 1894
professes to establish an exemption of $4,000, nevertheless.
persons whose incomes are within that line are to be sub-
ject to an income tax on so much income as they may
derive from dividends. The corporation paying the tax
levied on its net income evidently pays, and is intended by
the act to pay, an income tax for every stockholder whose
dividend is thereby diminished, whether he is a million-
aire or a poor man. It is clear that the stockholder in
such a case remains subject to the tax, unless some pro-
vision is made for refunding to him the amount paid on
his account. Under the English law, where dividends or
interest have thus been taxed at the source, any stock-
holder or creditor entitled to exemption from income tax
can obtain repayment of the tax thus unduly exacted.
from him, by making application in the proper place and
form. But no provision of this sort is made in the new act
of Congress; and a person supposed to be exempt from
taxation under the law may, in fact, be subject to taxation
on his whole income if, as sometimes happens, he receives
it all from dividends. No doubt the machinery for mak-
ing a rebate to small incomes in such cases would have to
be elaborate, and would be difficult to manage,- more dif-
ficult, perhaps, in this country than in one so compact and
homogeneous as England. This, however, is a part of the
problem of taxation of income at the source that has to be
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:59:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
