3. If you would have entered this University in any case, what
course would you have taken if the School of Commerce had not been
established?
I received replies from every one of the students, with results as
follows:
Twenty-six reply that they would not have entered this or any
other university had not the School of Commerce been established.
They would have gone instead directly into business. Three are un-
certain, but state that they would have probably taken a special
course in some college or university, selecting such studies as would,
in their opinion, best prepare them for business. Of the remainder,
24 would have entered our College of Letters and Science, 9 the Civic-
Historical course, 8 the General Science course, 5 the English course,
2 the Modern Classical course. Of the remainder, 6 would have en-
tered the Engineering School, 4 the Law School, and 2 the College of
Agriculture. I interviewed the 12 last mentioned students, and dis-
covered that in every case they would have taken the Engineering,
the Law, or the Agricultural course, not because they wished to make
themselves engineers, lawyers or farmers, but because in the opinion
of themselves or their fathers, these courses furnished a better prepa-
ration for business than the courses in the College of Letters and
Science.
It seems to me that these statistics indicate very clearly the need for
Schools of Commerce. At any rate, we are satisfied that in the estab-
lishment of the School we have reached a new constituency which has
not been previously attracted by our University courses.”
MONOGRAPHS, PAPERS, AND ADDRESSES ON COMMER-
CIAL EDUCATION
BY EDMUND J. JAMES.
Conrad's
1. Das Studium der Staatswissenschaften in Amerika.
Jahrbücher for Nationalökonomie und Statistik N. F.: VII
Band. Jena, 1883.
2. Outline of a Proposed School of Political and Social Science.
Philadelphia Social Science Association, 1885.
3. The Study of Politics and Business at the University of Pennsyl-
vania. Philadelphia, 1889.
4. Schools of Finance and Economy,
Address before American
American In-
Bankers' Association. Saratoga, 1890.
5. Economic and Social Aspects of Public Education.
stitute of Instruction. Boston, 1891.
6. The University and the Higher Education of Business Men.
National Education Association. Toronto, 1891.