thus opened for the school, though the two-year curriculuın, which
was open to students upon the completion of the first two years in
college, was retained.
When Albert S. Bolles accepted a position in the State government
at Harrisburg, Edmund J. Jaines was entrusted with the practical ad-
ministration of the school, and later appointed Director. For admis-
sion to the curriculum, now lengthened from two to four years, were
demanded in general the same requisites as for the classical or tech-
nical colleges. Many new courses were added, with a result of
strengthening and establishing the department more firmly. In-
structors were appointed in the theory and practice of accounting,
transportation, banking, journalism, and other practical subjects,
besides additional instructors in economics and politics. The four-
year plan thus adopted by the Wharton School has been accepted, as
indicated in the text, by most of our institutions which have under-
taken this work. As an evidence of the demand for this kind of in-
struction, the fact may be stated, that while the Wharton School
course is one of a large number of elective courses offered in the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, it has a greater attendance than the average
The following table shows the attendance from 1895
of the courses.
to 1901.
1895.
1898
1901.
1896
1899-
1897
1900-
NOTE II.
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN SCHOOL OF COMMERCE.
As indicative of the interest which the new departments have
created, the following statement made by Professor William A. Scott,
Director of the new School of Commerce in the University of Wiscon-
sin, is of interest:
Eighty-four students have registered in our School of Commerce
up to date. Of these, 61 are freshmen, 17 sophomores, 3 juniors, and
3 specials. Of this total, 65 have come to the University for the first
time this year, and 19 have transferred from some other courses in
the University. In order to find out exactly what proportion of the
students would have come to the University had not the School of
Commerce been established, I sent a circular letter to each one asking
the three following questions:
1. Would you have come to this University if the School of Com-
merce had not been established?
2. Would you have gone to some other university if the School of
Commerce had not been established?