32
American Economic Association
popular arguments regarding protection than on any
subject in the wide field of economics. As to most of
the familiar arguments for protection, either all the econ-
omists are hopelessly in the wrong, or else the protec-
tionist reasoning is hopelessly bad.
The mercantilist view of international trade, ex-
ploded though it has been time and again, has a singu-
larly tenacious hold. Even among the most intelligent
writers in financial journals, the familiar attitude is that
of rejoicing in a gain of exports, regretting a gain of im-
ports: rejoicing in an inflow of specie, bewailing its out-
flow; so familiar that probably the immense majority of
persons who have never been systematically trained in
economics take this point of view as a matter of course.
Now, in a country whose monetary system is top-heavy,
the relation of imports to exports may not automatically
adjust itself without causing trouble. But the difficulty
in such case, if there be one, is in the circulating medi-
um, and presents questions of monetary reform, not any
problem as to the gain or loss from international trade.
No doubt there are some other problems of real com-
plexity in the relation of exports and imports. A coun-
try whose exports grow rapidly and are readily absorbed
by foreign countries, may thereby secure its imports on
more advantageous terms. This has probably been the
situation of the United States, especially during the last
thirty years. On the other hand, a country which de-
pends on international trade for obtaining commodities
essential for its economic well-being and not procurable
at home, must look to its exports as the means whereby
these essentials shall be secured; and such a country
must have a watchful eye on the continuance and growth
of its exports. This has doubtless been the situation of
England during the last thirty years. But these are
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:36:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
