deserves to be noted that the direction which these impulses
take in modern times have led to great gains for
the community. The industrial ideal has supplanted the
military, or if not supplanted it, at least risen to equal
prominence and attractiveness. The satirist and the
lover of the simple life may be amazed that the sort of
distinction which is given by the mere possession of
wealth should be so highly prized; but the substitution.
of this avenue to distinction for the feudal one of birth
and valor has meant an immense stimulus to material
progress and peaceful accumulation. Similarly the vent.
which the passion for mastery has found in industrial
conquest has meant an enormous gain for peace, industry,
mutual service. Your feudal baron or mediæval
statesman was essentially of the robber type. At best,
he was a sort of watch dog, whose business it was to prevent
others from plundering his charges. Our modern
fortune-builder is often portrayed as the counter-type of
the feudal baron; nor can it be denied that, in the ramifications
of modern industry, there are great possibilities
for mere rapacity. But such after all is not the main
effect, certainly not the sole effect, of the money-making
activities. Enterprise, invention, the development of the
fruitful division of labor, the organization of new
schemes, the opening of new lands and the utilization of
new resources,-these have been the main conditions
and accompaniments of great fortunes. We can no
longer hold the semi-theological view reflected in Adam
Smith's oft-quoted phrase, that the individual is "led
by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no
part of his intention"; but we may at least be thankful
that the impulses which move the strong and ambitious
are so often turned to the achievements of peace and
industry.
But, if the community has thus gained from the turning
of the love of distinction to the worship of wealth,
and of the masterful passion to industrial conquest, it
does not follow that this common gain may not be se-