36
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
State exists in intangible forms of this all but a mere
bagatelle escapes taxation entirely, when the attempt is
made to reach it in the form of property."* The inability.
of the law to reach that which is known to the tax-payer
alone is everywhere notorious, and shows itself in such ab-
surd results as the apparent decline of personal property in
highly prosperous communities. After long and obstinate
efforts to enforce it, the taxation of intangible property
has failed even in States like Massachusetts, where the
machinery for its enforcement has been as carefully per-
fected as anywhere, and has found constant support in the
robust faith of legislators and administrative officers.
The difficulties in the way of assessing an income tax
upon declarations made by the tax-payers appear to the
writer to be completely analogous to those which defeat
the taxation of personal property. The sources of a large
part of the current income of individuals are the very
classes of intangible property which constantly elude as-
sessment. The dependence for the disclosure of income
in general is on the same average degree of honest compli-
ance with law, which has hitherto proved insufficient for
the success of State taxation in pari materia. What
reason is there for expecting any better result under the
act of 1894 than has been secured under a multitude of
State laws?
It is probable that reliance is placed on the power of the
United States government to enforce its will where a
single State fails; and, in dealing with some classes of
evils, the superiority of the central power and its freedom
from the influences which sometimes hamper local author-
ity is undeniable. It is sometimes of unspeakable im-
portance that a power not affected by the passion or rul-
ing interests of a narrow community should come in, with
its irresistible strength, to enforce the laws made for the
benefit of the whole, and to protect the general interests.
of the nation. But the present case is not analogous to
* Report of the Tax Commission of Ohio of 1893, p. 42.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:59:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
