66
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
or less convenient and attractive in form, more or less
trustworthy as to substance and weight. In my work of
1878 I offered what seems to me a very important qualifi-
cation of Ricardo's proposition regarding the value of
corrupted coin. That qualification had reference to the
large possibilities of extending barter whenever popular
confidence in the coin becomes impaired. The commer-
cial history of the United States during the Revolutionary
War, of France during the time of the assignats, and I
doubt not of other countries under a régime of incon-
vertible paper money largely depreciated, illustrates the
importance of noting this condition. By the corruption
of the coin, or merely by its becoming inconvenient and
unattractive, much more by the fluctuations of an inflated
paper circulation, the penalty upon direct exchange may
be so diminished as largely to widen the field of barter.
And in the same way everything that adds to the con-
venience, attractiveness, and trustworthiness of the money
in use, may cause that field to be encroached upon. All
this, however, has nothing to do with the validity of our
proposition. It is still the goods which are exchanged for
money, be these more or fewer, and not the goods which
are bartered, be those fewer or more, which contribute to
that demand for money which determines price.
Our third step is involved in more of difficulty and of
embarrassment. We are now to suppose that, of the goods
which are, in the usual acceptation of the term, sold for
money, a portion, let us say a considerable portion, are not
paid for at the time. Credit is given either for a definite
or an indefinite term. What is the effect of this upon the
value of money? Do these goods contribute to the de-
mand for money which determines price? The sales are
made in terms of money; money is promised; money is,
we will for the present say, sooner or later, to be paid.
Let us here introduce a distinction. Let it first be
assumed that the credit is to remain individual, if I may
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:54:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
