48
American Economic Association
forts. The problem of protection to young industries
thus offers an especial field for the inductive and his-
torical method in its stricter sense,—the patient in-
vestigation of particular cases, and the possible final
construction of an edifice of truth, by the slow gather-
ing of fragments of knowledge.
For the purpose of aiding legislation in our own day,
however, investigation of this sort must be confined to
modern experience; the experience, say, of the nine-
teenth century. Investigations as to earlier periods, as
to the industrial regime of the Middle Ages, the system
of Colbert, the early protective policy of Great Britain,
the paternalism of the rulers of Brandenburg and Prus-
sia, will teach us little for the problems of the present.
The value and interest of such investigatlons are not to
be denied. We have shed certain notions of the earlier
economists as to the necessary harmfulness or futility of
the conscious direction of industry, and know that we
have still much to learn about the causes of progress in the
past. But modern conditions differ radically from those
preceding the nineteenth century, and have changed
fundamentally in the last fifty years. Technical educa-
tion has been so improved and diffused as to make
immensely easier the adoption anywhere of a new pro-
cess. All the means of communicating knowledge,
from the printing press to the telegraph, serve to spread
rapidly information about changes in the arts. Restric-
tions on the sale or export of machinery have disap-
peared. Capital is abundant, and is constantly and
eagerly seeking fresh employment. There is no need
of further enumeration; it is obvious that the conditions
are very different from those that had to be faced by the
undertaker of the seventeenth and eighteenth century,
even of the first half of the nineteenth. Whatever we
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:36:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
