the suppression of a riot which has become too strong for
a State government to deal with, or to a case of threat-
ened interruption of the mails or of interstate commerce.
This is a case of widely prevailing inability to meet a certain
strain upon the conscience, and is not to be met by march-
ing in troops, and is not at all affected by the circumstance
that certain public officers receive their orders from
Washington, and not from a State capital. The federal
power, after all, can act in this matter only by mak-
ing its rules stringent and its penalties severe. It must
proceed, that is to say, in the same direction in which
the State governments have been moving; and, if it is
expected to advance farther than they, this can be only
because it is supposed that its measures will be more
severe or more strictly enforced. But what power, fed-
eral or other, can by sheer severity carry through suc-
cessfully a system which demands from the individual
conscience more than is required by the general moral
sense of the community? Increased severity in such a
case must inevitably be met by increased ingenuity, and
this all the more certainly if the severity is practised
under an authority which is felt to be in any degree exter-
nal and remote. Not much can be argued in the present
case from the measure of success attained in the enforce-
ment of the income tax of the Civil War and for a few
years after. The United States government was then
supported by a vast current of popular feeling, which for
a time was ready to treat any attempt to evade public
dues in the hour of calamity as a species of treason; and
yet it would still be easy to collect the evidence of the in-
creasing difficulty which was experienced in finding the
incomes to be taxed, after the danger had passed and the
enthusiasm of the time had begun to cool. With no great
tide of sentiment now existing in support of unusual fed-
eral taxation, there appears to be no ground for believ-
* See Dr. J. A. Hill's estimates, Quarterly Journal of Economics, July, 1894,
pp. 445-448.