healthy reaction on our own problems from our experiments
in colonial government, are likely to be disappointed.
Nor is the lesson of German officialdom in
every respect convincing. It shows what can be done,
not by educating a democracy, but by disregarding it.
In Germany itself, it rests on conditions that we may expect
to see readjusted in course of time. The steady
growth of the social democracy bears impressive testimony
that the tide of democratic sentiment which shows
itself in all the civilized countries, is rising in Germany
also. Will not that country also be confronted, sooner
or later, with the special problems which popular rule
has universally brought? It would be idle to speculate
at what distant time and by what processes this transformation
may come, or what results it will bring. It
suffices for our present purpose to bear in mind that the
peculiar historical basis of the German bureaucratic
system can never be reproduced in other countries, least
of all in a democracy like our own. Lessons may be
learned from it, but the thing itself can not be copied.
Let us turn then in conclusion to the special problems
of democracy. These are two-fold: problems of
intelligence, and problems of character.
First, as to the problems of intelligence. I have already
indicated the point on which I believe them
chiefly to converge. The best hope for improving the
machinery of government lies in lengthening the terms.
of service for the administrative officers; in reducing the
number of elected officials, and enlarging the appointing
power; in simplifying the machinery of municipal and
state government, perhaps of the national government as
well. All this involves an abrogation of power by the
voter. He must consent to keep hands off,-if not forever,
at least for long periods at a time. Only by some
such change will it be possible to enlist and hold in
public service men of the needed capacity.
There is abundant evidence that our political system
is improving in this direction. We are busily reshaping