54
American Economic Association.
bird; two bosses compete to employ the same workman.
From the standpoint of the bosses, the transaction bears
some analogy to the case of the cats. From the stand-
point of the workman, the transaction bears no analogy
whatever to the case of the bird. The more cats there
are, the worse for the bird, as well as for the cats; the more
bosses there are, the worse for the bosses, but the better
for the workman. When Adam Smith showed the
efficiency of competition as a regulator of price and an
increase of useful production, he furnished a powerful
defence for the existing social order. He cannot, how-
ever, for that reason, be fairly charged with having been
an advocate of the interests of the property owner. The
weight and force of his reasoning lay in the fact that he
showed the beneficent effects of such competition upon
the community as a whole, rather than on persons most
immediately interested. He may have exaggerated.
those good effects and underrated the evils by which
they were accompanied. I shall not now try to discuss
that point. But his permanent and decisive influence
as a social reformer lay not in an advocacy of the views.
of any class, but in his advocacy of a means of correct-
ing the formation of class lines. The success of com-
petition, so far from warranting us in the adoption of a
system of political morality and a theory of political
progress, based on advocacy of class interests. proves
rather the advantage and even the necessity of subordi-
nating those interests to a wider common good.
With the institution of representative government the
case is somewhat different. Here we have an organiza-
tion of localities and of classes, and a recognition of such
classes in the actual work of government. It would,
therefore, seem as though the success of this system
were a powerful argument on the side of that theory
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 04:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
