timated and actual receipts is strong evidence of success-
ful administration, and raises a presumption in favor of the
adoption of a similar method even under the different
conditions presented in this country.
It is true that, by the Prussian law of 1891, the declara-
tion is now made the basis of assessment of the income
tax in that country. The people of Prussia have had a
long course of education under the various forms assumed
by the class and income tax since 1820.* At long inter-
vals the law has been strengthened until, from a rough
classification of the tax-payers by merely external signs,
it has advanced to its present demand that the tax-payer
shall show that his income falls between certain rather
close limits. But the Prussian declaration, made under
affirmation, and "to the best of his knowledge and belief,"
is a simple document compared with that which formerly
confronted the American tax-payer, or that which is con-
templated by the recent act; and it is likely to have a
much less important place in the business of assessment.
It calls only for general statements of the distribution of
the tax-payer's income under the four heads referred to on
page 32, and leaves to the chairman of every board of
assessment a wide discretion as to the extent to which he
shall carry further inquiry.† The Prussian declaration, in
short, appears to be a rather cautious tentative advance
from a system of extreme laxity,- an experiment of
which the success has not yet been tested by sufficient
practice to make it significant for the United States.

#### Footnotes:
\*See Quarterly Journal of Economics, January, 1892, p. 207, for an article on
this subject by Dr. J. A. Hill.
†The administrative instructions, published by the Minister of Finance, re-
quire, in Article 55, that the chairman shall see that the assessment is not
negligently made upon incorrect declaration, and then add the caution,-“An-
drerseits sind kleinliche Erörterungen über geringfügige Punkte und jede
nicht zur Erreichung des Zweckes gebotene Belästigung der Steuerpflichtigen
zu vermeiden." See Das preussische Einkommensteuergesetz, p. 204 of Krause's
8vo edition.