Love of Wealth and the Public Service
15
elemental instincts of democracy are themselves ob-
stacles to the best working of democracy.
The jealousy of the executive is something more than
a survival from the outlived exigencies of earlier
centuries. It has its roots deep in the everyday prepos-
sessions of the average man. Those who have read the
voluminous history of trade-unionism in England which
Mr. and Mrs. Webb have put together with such splendid
industry, will have been struck with the lesson which
those authors draw as to the working of pure democracy.
The trade union is loth to put authority into the hands
of its leaders. It clings to town-meeting government.
The necessities of the case have indeed compelled a
gradual stiffening of the organization. More and more
power has been delegated to the executive committees
and general secretaries, and perpetual referendum has
been given up. The imperative need of efficiency in a
fighting organization has caused a departure from the
pure simplicity of democratic principle, and an accept-
ance of something like single-handed leadership; yet
even here, under the pressure of vital interest and the
most obvious need, slowly, grudgingly, incompletely.
The working of the same impulse is familiar to every
one who watches our American democracy. There is
always an uneasy fear of "getting away from the people."
Hence the predominance of elected officials, the con-
fusing multiplicity of elections, the helplessness of the
voter in face of an endless list of unknown candidates for
office, and so the necessity of party organization to
give a clue and meaning to the whole, and the natural
evolution of the boss. In times of stress and peril,
democracy turns instinctively to a dictator. But in the
humdrum days of peace, it clings no less instinctively to
its own possession of power.
This state of mind, like all our impulses and opinions,
rests largely on tradition. The habitual glorification of
democracy has strengthened it, and it has been further
strengthened by the worship of the Constitution.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
