68
80
American Economic Association.
passes down from generation to generation lies back of
contract and expresses itself in and through contract.
As a result of the nature of man, of the conditions of
existence in a world like ours, and of the great historical
institutions which have come down to us, men exist in
classes. These classes, in modern times, rest upon an
economic foundation. Even the political classes of
earlier days had, in the beginning, an economic basis,
but the older political classes are, in our day a com-
paratively small matter. The Century Dictionary de-
fines class as follows: "An order of or rank of persons;
a number of persons having certain characteristics in
common, as equality in rank, intellectual influence, edu-
cation, property, occupation, habits of life."
The existence of classes, which is absolutely neces-
sary, resting upon a foundation beyond the power of
man to control, gives complexity to our problem of
liberty. A modern jurist has used these words, which
have a profound significance in our discussion of the
problem of liberty: "There is no greater inequality than
the equal treatment of unequals."
The problem of liberty includes the problem of suitable
control over the relations which exist among men; for
these relations determine the conditions of our social ex-
istence. These relations may be considered individually
and socially, and the social action may be either of private
or public character. The action of a trades union in its
endeavor to secure favorable relations, is private social
action; a statute, determining the length of the working
day, is public social action; and both alike aim, success-
fully or unsuccessfully as the case may be, to promote
liberty. All action which endeavors to remove ignor-
ance and superstition and to strengthen the individual,
mentally, morally and physically, is action which en-
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:34:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
