THE NEW INCOME TAX
27
It is a great misfortune that the question of a fresh
resort to the income tax should have come up under such
untoward circumstances, and that it should have received
such a solution as this. The question is of too great im-
portance to be disposed of with so little real study as it
received from Congress, and the income tax is too impor-
tant a resource to be discredited in the public mind by the
working of an imperfect and crude system. The subject
was one for the best and most careful thought of the
legislator, in the light of the important body of practice
to be found in other countries as well as our own. So
far from the careful examination which it required, the
matter has had only a snap judgment, and the probability.
of any thorough treatment of it by our government is
indefinitely removed. In the minds of a large part of our
people the income tax will be more thoroughly identified
than ever with the system in vogue during the Civil War;
and five years hence they will seem to have had a fresh
trial and bitter experience of the income tax, when, after
all, it is only an income tax, and that a badly devised.
one, which they have seen applied for the second time.
The language used above, no doubt, implies a certain
acceptance of the general theory of taxing income. There
is good reason for the agreement between the theoretical
views of so many economists on this subject and the
instinctive popular belief, which is so often met. It is,
after all, the aggregate income of society which supplies
the fund, and determines an upper limit, for public expen-
diture; and it is the income of each individual member of
the society which supplies the fund, and determines the
limits, for his contribution to that expenditure. Every
tax, says Adam Smith, must be paid from one or other
of the sorts of revenue which make up the private
revenues of individuals; and his maxim which follows,
to the effect that the subjects of a State ought to con-
tribute to its support as nearly as possible in proportion
-
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:59:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
