new income tax may thus fill a hiatus in our legislation,
the presence of which is now sometimes noted with regret.
But it is to be remembered that not a few of the States
now levy such duties, that more of them are likely to do
so, and that in a comprehensive view of the whole field of
taxation, therefore, the transmission of property at death
did not require this attention from the federal legislator.
If it did require such attention, it may be added, then
plainly the succession to real property should have been
taxed, as well as personal inheritances.
The purpose of the provision for taxing personal inheri-
tances, however, is probably not so much to fill a gap in
our legislation as to strike a blow at large accumulations.
The blow is not a heavy one, although the income tax of
2 per cent. is double the rate which was levied during the
war upon the transmission in the direct line of property,
real or personal. Except as a first step, to be followed
in the future by some more serious legislation, this tax
will probably have no appreciable effect upon the great
fortunes. On the successors to small properties the moral
effect, however, may be considerable. The man of rela-
tively small means, who finds his "income" carried above
the limit of $4,000 by his inheritance of a small prop-
erty, and a tax exacted from him for the excess, is certain
to feel his grievance keenly; and the number of such
men on the list of possible tax-payers is vastly greater
than the number of inheritors of large properties. To
such men, and to the public generally, the word "in-
come" has a certain definite meaning, not to be confused
with capital by any eccentricity of a statute; and the vio-
lence done to this understanding, when a so-called “in-
come tax takes away a share of the source of income, is
tolerably sure to leave behind a sense of personal wrong,
like that which can still be remembered as among the
fruits of the income tax of the Civil War.
Leaving this special case of inheritances, it may be re-