a framework of democratic apparatus, the
government of Prussia has remained essentially
bureaucratic. The official class is beset by no doubt
as to its power or tenure, no serious checks in its
pursuance of a settled policy. The aristocratic associa
tions of the service, the traditions of vigorous activity
maintained by the Hohenzollerns, the free gratification
of the love of distinction by titles and decorations, have
drawn into its ranks a large measure of the best ability
of the country. Your German bureaucrat is not always.
an agreeable person. But he is usually hardworking and
assiduous, his advancement depends on his efficiency,
and his work gives an opening to the man of power and
resource. Hence the governmental machine in Germany
shows results comparable to those of the great leaders
of private industry in English-speaking countries.
To take a striking example, what more remarkable
achievement has there been in modern times than the
German system of workmen's insurance? No doubt we
may make reservations even in admitting its success.
Some of the most cherished objects,-the placation of
social unrest and the checkmating of the socialists,—have
failed of attainment. It is a question still what gains
have been secured in the fundamental task of uplifting
the character of the people; whether the whole system.
is not after all but a magnified poor-law, with the inevitable
limitations of every such mechanical scheme.
But nevertheless it stands as a wonderful administrative
achievement. The systematic organization and control
of numberless groups of insuring and insured; the interweaving
of central control with local administration; the
regulation of complex financial problems and the accumulation
and investment of millions of capital funds;
the development of a whole new department of legal
practice and adjudication; the extension of the principle
to new fields, and its amendments and improvement
in the light of actual experience; not least, the
combination of a strong spirit of charity for the poor