of a government, by reason of the manifest difficulty of
justly administering it, will accept it as a proper provision.
for sudden and severe stress. In the presence of a great
public exigency the inequalities of any tax cease to weigh
with their full weight in comparison with a quick and
copious yield of revenue. This was the case in the Civil
War, when it was not so much the ignorance and inex-
perience of Congress as the imperative necessity of obtain-
ing money by the quickest process, that was the real cause
of many harsh and unjust provisions in our financial legis-
lation; and the same thing will happen again whenever
some heavy strain is felt by the federal treasury. Unless
our system is improved by the addition of some important
tax which is capable of sudden expansion, without the in-
convenience which attends any change in a tax on com-
modities, we shall again see the government driven, may
indeed see it driven in any year, to lay some bad tax or
to borrow, in order to bridge over the gap caused by the
slow increase of ordinary taxation. As a provision for
such cases of extremity, the tax on incomes, if shaped
for the purpose, has no superior and no rival; but it can
best be shaped in a time of quiet. Maintained at a low
rate in ordinary times, and its methods and machinery
thus perfected and made familiar, it might put in the hands.
of Congress a resource in case of need, such as has been
sorely missed in many turns of our affairs.
How the income tax of 1894 fails to meet the necessities
either of ordinary or of extraordinary occasions may best
be shown after a brief recapitulation of its leading provi-
sions. For five years, beginning with 1895, a tax of 2
per cent. becomes due on the first day of July in each
year on gains, profits, and incomes, in excess of $4,000,†

#### Footnotes:
\* The sections of the Tariff Act of 1894 providing for the income tax are
§§ 27-36.
†The English law, as modified by the legislation of the present year, ex-
empts £160 from all incomes under £400, and £100 from all between £400 and