46
American Economic Association.
bers of the American Economic Association that modern
political economy contains two distinct parts-often in-
extricably intermingled in fact, yet always separate in
principle-a theory of distribution and a theory of pros-
perity. The theory of distribution shows how the pub-
lic wealth is divided among the different members of
the community. It shows what are the effects of a sys-
tem of laws or a group of commercial conditions on the
relative well-being of the different classes concerned.
It tries to predict how changes in these laws will in-
crease the material comfort of some individuals and
diminish that of others. The theory of prosperity, on
the other hand, is concerned primarily with the good or
evil of the nation as a whole. It deals with aggregate
results rather than with individual ones, and concerns
itself with the separate parts only as they must be
studied in order to understand that aggregate effect.
The distinction between these two sets of theories is
not quite the same as that between static and dynamic
economics; for a considerable part of the theory of dis-
tribution deals with dynamic problems-with effects
which are essentially the result of industrial progress
rather than of static adjustment. It much more nearly
coincides with the old antithesis between deductive and
historical schools. It may perhaps fairly be said to be
a precise statement of a distinction for which the earlier
members of the historical school were feeling, but which
they failed to grasp or formulate in precise fashion—a
failure which reacted seriously upon the influence of
this school in matters of economic controversy. Be this
as it may, the distinction is a real and permanent one.
Men may agree absolutely in their theories of distribu-
tion and disagree toto coelo in their theories of pros-
perity. Marx, in his theory of distribution, followed
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 04:04:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
