use that expression; that the obligation is not to be transferred,
but that the debtor and the creditor are to remain
the same persons until the close of the transaction. In
this case, I should say, with deference, that goods so sold
contribute to the demand for money just as truly as goods.
sold for cash; but I should add, not just as much. The
factor by which the amount of such goods is multiplied, to
give their effect in determining the demand for money, is
lower. In the case, at least, of goods sold on definite
terms of credit, there is a considerable, often a very large,
economy in the use of money, as compared with the conditions
of production and trade where "trust " is not given.
It is not necessary to keep such large amounts of money
in the shops or to carry them around on the person.
But now let it be supposed that credits are no longer
individual, in the sense in which we have used that term,
but that transference by indorsement has become general,
and that banks have arisen which receive deposits of commercial
paper representing a very large part of the wholesale
transactions of the community. What shall be the
effect of this on the value of money? According to my
way of thinking, so far as this transference of obligations,
especially in the case of the bank, which thereby becomes
creditor to many debtors and debtor to many creditors,
results in the cancellation of indebtedness, as to an enormous
extent it does, these transactions are, so far as concerns
the use and by consequence the value of money, the
same essentially as if they had been acts of barter. Exchanges
of this category do not involve the employment of
money; and they are therefore to be counted out when
we are considering the causes and conditions which determine
the value of money. They constitute no part of the
demand for money.
Two transactions upon credit which
in time and amount balance each other, and which, as a
matter of fact, cancel each other when brought together in
the bank, are, for our present purpose, equivalent to one