Social Aspects of Economic Law
69
superiority of personal to real taxes must be completely
modified. The new ideal is a tax on wealth, the old
ideal was a tax on the individual who owned the wealth.
The new ideal is a tax on the economic process or
phenomenon, the old ideal is a tax on the individual
subject of the phenomenon. The contrast is striking
and profound.
The origin of our present confusion is not far to seek.
In the middle ages there was no active competitive life.
Land was not commonly bought or sold, corporate securi-
ties scarcely existed, and there was well nigh no field
for capitalization of taxation. Exemptions were granted
to individuals and to classes-not to classes of property,
but to classes of individuals owning property, which is
a very different thing. Taxes on consumption were so
contrived as to fall with crushing severity on the indus-
trious and the worthy. What wonder that the cry went
up for justice through individual equality of taxation.
And even to-day, in parts of this country where more
primitive economic conditions still prevail, there is some
saving virtue in a general property tax, as perhaps else-
where in a general income tax, each considered as a person-
al obligation. The simpler a community, the weaker are
the action and interaction of social economic forces; the
more scope is there for the emphasis on the individual fac-
tor. But in the more complex society of to-day, the society
of competitive capitalism, of mobility of economic agents,
of large industry and modern media of communication,
the problem is no longer that of the individual, but of the
effect of economic law on the various classes of society,
on the agencies of production and on the facts of group,
rather than individual, consumption. What I have
called the disappearance theory of taxation rests on the
facts of social production and of group consumption.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:20:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
