70
American Economic Association
What are the conclusions to be drawn from this the-
ory? They can be put succinctly as follows: Under con-
ditions as they already exist in a large part of this coun-
try, and as they are fast coming to exist in the remain-
der, the effort to secure justice in taxation does not im-
ply the need of considering only the individual. It is
not necessary to impose a tax on general property, for the
same result can be reached by taxing only special classes
of property, provided of course that we do not repeat the
mediæval error of exempting particular individual own-
ers within each class. It is not requisite to tax all cor-
porations, since it suffices to tax only certain classes of
corporations. It is not necessary to tax all incomes,
when the same end can be attained by taxing certain
specific sources of income. Above all, while we do not
need to tax all consumable commodities, as by the gen-
eral excises of former days, it is equally unnecessary to ap-
ply the predicate "just" to direct taxes, and to withhold
it from indirect taxes.
But I must not be misunderstood. In our impatience
with the old doctrine, we must be careful not to jump
too far to the other extreme. While it is true that prop-
erty taxes which are not shifted tend, according to the
absorption theory, to be capitalized, thus exempting the
future owner, the burden still remains on the present
owner. That is the very meaning of absorption, as op-
posed to diffusion. Final disappearance does not mean
immediate disappearance, and in many cases the imme-
diate results are the important ones for the individual.
It is manifestly unfair to make the present bear all the
load of the future.
Hence it behooves us to go slowly. We must hesitate
before levying high special taxes on particular kinds of
business for fear of injuring the business itself, and thus
sacrificing both future and present. We must pause be-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:20:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
