Love of Wealth and the Public Service
13
statutes are framed by those who have no responsibility
for their working. The authority of the executive
is commonly restricted by the confirmation of appoint-
ments at the hands of the legislature, or some branch of
it. It is further restricted by the popular election, in
most states and cities, of a great number of subordinate
officials.
-
-a matter
The consequences are obvious and too familiar. The
position of chief executive officer in city or state does
not tempt the able man of affairs. The clearest illustra-
tion is to be found in our municipal troubles. In every
one of our misgoverned cities there is no lack of capable
and public-spirited men, able and willing to give them-
selves to the vigorous administration of public business.
Managing ability, such as the posts demand, can be found
in plenty. But the conditions of the service do not call
it forth. Setting aside the difficulties of electing a man
of the right type if he were willing to serve,-
to which I shall presently turn,-the prospect of service.
after election is unattractive precisely to such a man.
What he sees before him is usually a complex and un-
wieldy political mechanism; a body of subordinate
officers imposed by popular vote; a right of check and con-
firmation by a municipal legislature, commonly a legisla-
ture with two cumbrous branches; an uncertainty as to the
statutory authority which will be conferred on him by
this legislature; and, not least, a brief term of office.
From all this there follows the necessity of caution and
compromise, of conciliating divergent and more or less
selfish interests, persuading suspicious and unintelligent
persons, entrusting the execution of well-laid plans to un-
tried and possibly insubordinate officials. Another elec-
tion must be faced within a year or two, and puts a
damper on the inception of far-reaching plans. Can we
wonder that the impulses for achievement and for
mastery find nothing attractive in the administration of
public affairs? In this matter, as in all human arrang-
ments, preferences and choices settle themselves into
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
