«
Love of Wealth and the Public Service
3
In considering these questions I shall have in mind.
primarily the kind of person described in our books as the
captain of industry"; the manager of large affairs, the
successful man. The qualities which this sort of person
must possess, and the nature of the operations he con-
ducts, have been abundantly discussed in recent eco-
nomic literature. But more has been said of the things
that he does than of the motives that lead him to
do them. The desire for wealth which actuates him is, as
Cliffe Leslie long ago remarked, not a simple motive, but
a very complex one, made up of all sorts of differing
passions and instincts. In trying to analyze him I confess.
to have something of the feeling which the natural-
ist must have when called on to examine and classify an
ichthyosaurus or a megatherium,-a huge and elaborate
monster, doubtless very terrible in the real world, and
not to be dissected even in the scholar's laboratory with-
out fear and trembling. Yet deliberate examination
may be expected to show that, however strange on first
inspection, and however striking as a species by himself,
this remarkable sort of person partakes of the general
characteristics of the genus homo, and that his ways can
be analyzed and laid bare like those of the ordinary man.
The several aspects or constituent elements of the
complex desire for wealth may be analyzed under four
heads first, love of ease and comfort; second, desire for
distinction; third, the impulse to activity; fourth, the
passion for power and mastery.
Of the first of these, the love of ease and comfort, little
need be said, both because the motive itself is simple
and obvious, and because it seems to play no great part
in our problem. We all wish abundant and varied food,
ample clothing, sufficient house room, opportunity for
recreation, and other resources of prosperous living. The
wide diffusion of such physical comfort, and the extent
to which the arts must advance before a satisfactory aver-
age can be secured, constitute the problem of production.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
