American Economic Association
lectual trend of the time. The drift was in all directions
toward simplicity and unity, toward the analysis of com-
plex phenomena into a few elements. In psychology,
the doctrine of association of ideas was dominant: all
human impulses were resolved into processes of associa-
tion with simple elements. In ethics, utilitarianism held
the field the sense of right and wrong, so far from being
thought innate, was regarded as a simple precipitate of
mankind's experience of gain or loss from different modes
of conduct. In economics the Ricardian theorems lent
themselves to a brief and consistent statement of a few
ruling principles, leading easily to a compact system of
clear-cut conclusions. All this made natural a rapid
analysis of the motives that influence men in their eco-
nomic doings: plain striving for wealth, such as was
seen in operation on all sides.
Since those days the course of thought has much
changed. Psychology has doubled on its tracks, as it were;
association of ideas does not tell the whole story; human
nature, we find, works with no single motive force, but
with a curious assortment of inconsistent impulses.
Utilitarianism throws a flood of light on the directions
which our moral judgments take; but it remains a ques-
tion whether there be not an instinct of right conduct,
very variable in range and degree, but no less deep
rooted than other instincts of the race. In economics,
much as the science has gained by the Ricardian
method of analyzing the bare working of fundamental
forces, we feel the imperative need of bearing in mind
the complexities of real life, the interaction of opposing
or converging causes. And so we are not content with
the acceptance of a simple desire for additional wealth
as the one human motive that deserves the attention
of the economist. Why always additional wealth? and
why additional wealth only? and is it not possible that
further examination of the apparently simple desire for
wealth may open new inquiries and point the way to
new conclusions ?
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
