sumer and thereby is enabled to make presents to the
foreigner? Yet the strength of vested interests, the
curious conservatism of party feeling, persistent sophistry
about giving employment to labor and turning the
wheels of industry, may keep the practice going for a
long period. Any measures that would bring it to an
early end should be welcome alike for the country that
dumps and for that into which there is dumping.ยน
I turn now to the other phase of this same question.
The competition of the United States and of other newly
opened countries has depressed the prices of various articles
of food in Europe; has restricted, or threatened to
restrict, the volume of agricultural production; and has
caused an increasing drift of population to manufacturing
industries.
new.
But these conditions, it is maintained,
are but temporary. The new countries will not remain
Their population grows rapidly, and their fresh
lands are fast being absorbed. It is to be expected that
sooner or later their numbers will be increased, and their
own food supply increasingly drawn on, until they have
no food for export. The countries to which this food
supply had been sent, and whose industries had been adjusted
on that basis, will find inevitable readjustment to
1 No doubt in weighing the advisability of such measures, it would
be necessary, and at the same time extremely difficult, to ascertain
whether the dumped article really was exported at an abnormally low
price. It is familiar knowledge that the Steel Corporation, for example,
is selling some articles for export at less than the domestic price.
But it is quite possible that the export price, while less than the domestic
price, is not really below the level of normal cost. So much
the worse, doubtless, for the consumer at home; but this is not a
matter that concerns the foreigner, who buys the steel at no more
and no less than a reasonable figure. It seems to be at least doubtful
whether the foreign sales are in fact likely to be made for any considerable
time at a price below the long-run cost of production. If
not, the question which presents itself is the ordinary one of protection,
not the peculiar one of a temporary dislocation of industry.