we sure that corruption and favoritism will be rejected
when they are known? Do the voters wish for honest
public service, efficient management, the use of the
machinery of government not for the gain of one class or
section, but for the single-minded advancement of com-
mon benefits? Will easy employment and favored treat-
ment enlist them as the supporters of political leaders
notoriously unfit? These are indeed in no small degree
questions of intelligence,-whether corruption will be
recognized as such, and gains for a particular class be
seen to conflict with the general welfare. Mainly, how-
ever, they are questions of character. Their right dis-
posal depends on the diffusion of the fundamental virtues.
Uprightness, steadfastness in work, good faith in the
affairs of everyday life, respect for law,-these are more
essential for the successful working of democracy than
intelligence in devising political machinery, and in choos-
ing the right men for working the machinery.
This after all, is the crux of our political and social
problems. Unless the stuff of the people be sound, our
scheming and teaching will be vain. All the study of
political science and constitutional law and comparative
administration, of economics and finance and industrial
organization, avails nothing unless there be a community
fit to profit by it. All the elaboration of more effective
governmental apparatus is useless unless the public really
wishes better government. And not only must we face
this fundamental problem, but we must face the peculiar
difficulty of dealing with it. Intelligence can be taught,
or at least greatly improved. But character grows by
slow steps, and under influences which it is almost im-
possible to reshape. It is affected, no doubt, by teaching
and exhortation, but it rests in the main on inherited quali-
ties and on the example and training which go from parent
to child. How large a part is played by inheritance,
how large by training and environment, we are much
in the dark; but we must resign ourselves to the certainty
that external influences, whether of preachers or school.