Thirteenth Annual Meeting.
69
believe in competition must, in order to secure the con-
ditions of its maintenance, ask for larger governmental
activity in matters of irrigation.
I regret that I can do no more here and now than
merely to allude to two somewhat antagonistic lines of
evolution. One is the movement which approaches-
without hope of ever reaching-real equality of oppor-
tunities in economic competition. This is one of the
most powerful movements of the century just drawing.
to a close and must be borne clearly in mind by any
one who would understand the great historical move-
ments of that century. The other line of development
is found in the construction of great institutions which
shut in and limit competition, but which nevertheless
are the very foundations upon which our civilization
rests; the institutions which may be likened to social
savings banks or depositories of race-achievements. I
have here in mind the great economic-juridical institu-
tions of society, such as private property, inheritance of
property and vested interests. The progressive ap-
proximation to equality in opportunities must not be
permitted to go so far as to undermine these institutions.
In the mutual adjustments of these two lines of evolu-
tion, namely, the equality of opportunity movement
and the institutional movements, we have given us one
of the weightiest and at the same time most delicate
tasks of the twentieth century.
Competition thus conceived is beneficent, and the
competitive order rightly controlled by society furnishes
to men the maximum of pleasure with a minimum of
pain. Not only does it insure progress for the race, but
to an increasing extent all men participate in the bene-
fits of this progress.
We have no evidence that the
competitive order is ultra-rational, and still less need
we believe that it is anti-rational, as Mr. Kidd asserts,
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:33:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
