made at the time, from the income on which it is actually
assessed, and not as a payment to be made from the in-
come of another year, which is perhaps less prosperous.
The English income tax, being levied at the source.
whenever possible, is almost necessarily a tax on current
income. The rate fixed by the important Finance Act of
July 31, 1894, for example, is to be levied on incomes
of the year beginning April 6, 1894, except in the cases
where, for convenience of approximation, the average in-
come of two or three years is taken as the basis. Even
the Prussian law of 1891, which follows in moderation the
plan of levying upon declaration, calls upon the tax-payer
to declare what his income is for the current tax year in
which the payment is to be made.* The provisions made,
however, by the law of the United States on this point are
whimsical in the extreme. The tax on income derived
from dividends and other profits, as well as the neglected
case of coupons, naturally suggests the collection of in-
come tax at the moment when the income accrues and
passes to the stockholder or creditor; but the law throws
away this opportunity, by postponing the levy upon the
corporation until the first half of the next year, when the
accounts of the calendar year for which the tax is laid shall
have been completely made up. But for all persons in the
service of the United States the income tax on the excess
of salaries above $4,000 is to be withheld from the salary
when paid, so that for this class of persons and to this ex-
tent the tax is laid upon the income of the current year,
and not of that preceding. +
*This is easily done of course with all fixed incomes from investments.
Variable and business incomes are to be returned at the average of the last
three years. See § 10 of the law of 1891.
† It was the intention at one stage of the bill to extend the provision for the
deduction of the tax from salaries, so as to require some employers besides the
United States to withhold the tax on any excess of salaries over $4,000, and to
pay it to the proper collecting officer; and § 28 contains two references to "that
portion of any salary upon which the employer is required by law to withhold,
and does withhold, the tax." In the final draft of the act, however, as printed