Social Aspects of Economic Law
73
tion and the fruition of those latent qualities and possi-
bilities that distinguish us from the brutes and that con-
stitute our personality. Moral development means self-
development, and progress can come only through free-
dom. Individualism in this sense is the very goal of all
achievement.
We must, however, not forget that the individual has
become what he is largely through society. Let us re-
member that side by side with the individual struggle
for existence, there has been the group struggle and
that, as has recently been pointed out, the mutual aid
within the group has been the very condition of the con-
test between the groups. Let us remember that the in-
dividual as he exists to-day has been hammered out by
society, that individual ethics is the result of social
ethics, and that individual progress is largely the conse-
quence of social progress.
Economics, politics and ethics are each of them a part
of the greater social science. In each of them we find
the universal problem of attaining unity in multiplicity.
The aim of economics is to show the reconciliation of
private wealth with public welfare; the object of politics
is to secure individual liberty through a free common-
wealth; the goal of ethics is to prove that individual
morality is in harmony with the very conception of the
universe. Economics shows how a prosperous indi-
vidual can come only through a prosperous society;
politics teaches how a free individual can persist only
in a free society; and ethics makes it clear how a per-
fect individual can be conceived only as a constituent of
a perfect society. Prosperity, freedom, morality-all
alike are at bottom social conceptions. They can be
reached in practice only through a common striving
together; they can be comprehended in theory only
through an analysis which accentuates the social
element.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:20:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
