64
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
the effective occasions for its use in exchange were meant;
and, consequently, we should have reference not merely
to the amount of goods produced, but also to the fre-
quency with which those goods were to be exchanged in
their passage from producer to consumer. Again, in
speaking of the supply of money, it would be understood,
almost without the necessity of explanation, that refer-
ence was had, not alone to the number of money-pieces,
but also, and conjointly with this, to the rapidity of their
circulation. "The nimble sixpence does the work of the
slow shilling."
Such is the situation in which no doubt arises regarding
the causes and conditions which determine the value of
money. Since the members of the community must have
money in order to exchange their goods, and since, by the
supposition, they must exchange their goods in order to
make it worth while to produce them, they, each and all,
must needs buy money. In order to buy it, they must
pay its price, give what it is worth. What it shall be
worth will depend, demand being fixed, upon the supply.
The cost of production of money will influence its value
only as it affects that supply. Conceivably, the money
thus brought into use might be an article which held no
appreciable cost of production, as, for example, an article
found on the surface, but naturally limited in quantity; or
it might be an article owing its use to authority or to
convention.
Now let us take the first step from the condition as-
sumed, in recognizing the fact that, in an actual com-
munity, all of the goods produced will not be subject to
exchange, and therefore will not contribute to the demand
for money.
The fisherman will consume no small part of
his catch in the support of his family; perhaps one-half of
the crops of the farmer will be eaten within his own house
and barn; the shoemaker, the tailor, and the hatter will
each wear and wear out some part, at least, of his own
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:54:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
