enjoyed in the preceding calendar year by any citizen of
the United States or any person resident therein, whether
derived from property, rents, interest, dividends, or salaries,
or from any profession, trade, or employment. The
taxable income is to be subject to the usual deductions
for taxes paid and losses incurred, but is to include all
personal property acquired by gift or inheritance. As a
basis for the assessment, every person
of lawful age, having
a taxable income of more than $3,500 in his own right or
in any fiduciary capacity, is to make "a list or return"
"of the amount of his income, gains, and profits," under
oath, with heavy penalties in case of refusal, neglect, or
false return. All corporations or associations doing business
for profit in the United States, not including partnerships,
are required to pay a tax of 2 per cent. annually
on their net profits for the preceding year; and, upon such
payment being made, dividends upon their stocks are not
to be included in computing the income of their stockholders.
On all salaries and payments for services due
from the United States, and in excess of $4,000, the tax
of 2 per cent. is to be withheld by the disbursing officer.
The first point which invites attention in the general
scheme of the new law is the singular provision for including
in the annual gains, profits, and income to be taxed.
the value of personal property received by gift or inheritance.
The difficulty of making a sound distinction between
income and growth of capital has always been recognized.
Financial writers have dwelt on the importance
of maintaining a line somewhere, and of so limiting taxation
as not to impede additions to the capital which is to
be the source of future income. The income tax of 1864
dealt with the subject with a rough hand, and probably
treated as taxable income much that should have been
£500. The Prussian law now exempts all income under 900 marks, and,
starting from that point with a tax of 6 marks, advances by degrees until for
incomes of 100,000 marks and upwards the tax is approximately 4 per cent.