76
American Economic Association.
plants and agencies of transportation, to be paid for as
any other costs of doing business, out of the proceeds of
the business. Unless it is rendered impossible for an
employee to contract-out of the obligation this wise pro-
vision in the interests of a large industrial liberty will be
nullified by private contracts. Consequently, we find in
the most advanced industrial countries the doctrine
established by the statute, or coming to prevail in one
way and another, that contracting-out of obligations,
established in the interests of public policy, cannot be
tolerated.
Another line of development in the interests of indus-
trial liberty must consist in opening up and increasing
opportunities for the acquisition of a livelihood by the
mass of men, in order that back of contracts there may
lie a nearer approximation to equality of strength on
the part of the two contracting parties. It is certain
that there will be a vast development along this line.
during the twentieth century, and through this develop-
ment we shall find liberty expressing itself increasingly.
through contract.
It is manifest, I think, that philosophical anarchy
furnishes us with no ideal. The absence of all social
regulations means the unrestricted tyranny of the strong.
Plato clearly saw this when he asserted that "the most
aggravated forms of tyranny and slavery arise out of
the most extreme form of liberty ".1
Mazzini also saw this clearly enough, when he said of
liberty: "If you enthrone it alone as means and end, it
will lead society first to anarchy, afterward to the des-
potism which you fear.2
We have not said all, however, that there is to be said.
concerning the ideal of anarchy when we have pointed
1
Republic, viii, 564, Jowett's translation, p. 272.
2 Mazzini,
"
Rights and wrongs", Publications of the Christian
Social Union, pp. 9-10.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:34:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
