The method of taxing income in the year in which it
accrues, especially if accompanied by the practice of stop-
ping the tax at the source of the income wherever possi-
ble, brings into view some possible conveniences in ad-
ministration which are lost by the method so familiar in
this country. Taxes on accruing dividends and interest,
paid by the debtor, must of necessity be pretty well dis-
tributed over the fiscal year, offering some advantages to
the Treasury not to be secured from a tax of which the
greatest part falls due at a single epoch. Collected at the
natural dividend periods such taxes come in by instal-
ments, to the considerable relief of the company or person
making the payment. It is then a natural and easy step.
to provisions, found both in the English and the Prussian.
systems, for the payment by instalments in some other
cases, when circumstances make this method convenient.
Probably for a large part of the community the option of
paying such a tax by quarterly payments, which is the gen-
eral rule under the Prussian law, instead of the lump sum
to which we are accustomed here, would make the collec-
tion a far less formidable proceeding than it must now ap-
pear as the day of reckoning draws on.
But beyond this there is another point at which the
whole relation of the tax-payer to the tax is altered, when
the income is taxed by instalments in the year in which it
accrues. The law of the United States allows the deduc-
tion from income of "losses actually sustained during the
year" but there can be no deduction for misfortune in-
curred in the year when the tax falls due. There is a
complete separation between the conditions under which
the liability for the tax accrues and those under which the
payment must be made. But, where the tax is levied
upon current income, it is brought into close correspond-
at Washington for public use, the provision for the payment of the tax by other
employers than the United States does not appear, so that these two references
are without meaning, except as evidence of the haste and confusion in which
this important measure was carried through.