162
American Economic Association.
celebration, the chief purpose of the university or col-
lege is not the imparting of information or the giving
of a special or technical training or the development of
scholars, but the securing of that breadth of view and
widened sympathy which is the result of the personal
intercourse of thousands of young men through a period
of three or four years under college and university in-
fluence, how vastly will this influence for good in every
direction be strengthened and increased, when in ad-
dition to the hundreds of young men in our colleges now
preparing for the professions we shall have other hun-
dreds preparing for commercial life. And this will surely
be the case if the universities recognize their duties
toward this great and growing class of our community.
If the business classes are destined to have an ever-in-
creasing influence in our society how necessary it is for
public welfare that as many members of these classes as
possible shall come under the influence, for a longer or
shorter time, of those great forces which make up our
modern university!
NOTE I.
THE WHARTON SCHOOL OF FINANCE AND ECONOMY.
The Wharton School was founded in 1881. Its course was at first
only two years, beginning with the junior year in college. Its cur-
riculum was composed largely of the ordinary college subjects taught
by men already appointed to teach in the university. The experiment
naturally failed, and there was talk of handing back the endowment
to Mr. Wharton, on the ground that there seeined to be no special de-
mand for such instruction. It was decided, however, to make a new
departure. Albert S. Bolles was appointed Professor of Mercantile
Law and Practice, in February, 1883, and entrusted with the organiza-
tion of the department; Robert Ellis Thompson was retained as Pro-
fessor of Political Economy; Edmund J. James was called as Profes-
sor of Public Finance and Administration; and John Bach McMaster
as Professor of American History, political, constitutional and in-
dustrial, both beginning work in December, 1883. A new era was
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:30:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
