70
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS
which determines prices? It seems to be an opinion that
such a use of credit does constitute some other rule for de-
termining the value of money, which prompts the frequent
allusions to the fact that in such or such a bank the cash
payments constitute but three per cent. of the total trans-
actions or that in a given clearing house only a half of
one per cent. of the bank balances are settled in money.
Whenever a question arises regarding the sufficiency of
the present or the probable future supply of metallic
money, facts like these are thrust at us, not merely as
showing the economy effected in the use of money by the
organization of credit, but as if they showed that the sup-
ply of money had ceased to be of any consequence at all,
and that something other than the money supply had come
in to determine prices.
Now, it must be said that it is altogether consistent
with economic principles that the relative importance of
a subject of exchange should become so far diminished.
that it is released from the ordinary operation of the force
of self-interest. Money itself affords an example in point,
in the case of billon, the petty coin of small change, which
seems to be governed by something analogous to the law
of capillary attraction. Ordinarily, we say, water tends
to seek its level; and we find a world of illustrations of
that tendency, not merely in rivers, lakes, and oceans, but
in the crust of the earth and in the very atmosphere.
Yet, if a tube be only fine enough, water will stand in it,
at any height, without any regard to gravitation.
And
this exception is not merely of curious interest: the
whole vegetable creation subsists by virtue of it. So in
the case of billon, with a proper regulation of amount,
the market price and the mint price of the metal need
have no defined relation to each other. There seems to
be a sort of impression in the minds of the speakers and
writers to whom in this paper I refer, to the effect that
the volume of credit transactions in highly organized
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:54:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
