68
American Economic Association.
mean monopoly, either competition must be restored or,
where this is impossible, the ends of competition must
be secured by other methods of social control; and if
these methods of social control in some cases inean
public ownership and management of industries, a place
must be opened for the competitive principle in the
terms of admission to public employment.
It is at this point important to make a distinction too
often overlooked; namely, the radical difference between
that socialistic extension of governmental activity which
has in view the suppression of competition, and that con-
servative demand for an extension of governmental ac-
tivity which has in view the maintenance of competition.
There are certain conditions of success in competition.
which many economists believe cannot be supplied in-
dividually, but must be furnished by collective action.
Irrigation offers an illustration. It appears to be the
general opinion of careful students of irrigation, that the
laws of private property applied to water used for pur-
poses of irrigation, ultimately produce cessation of com-
petition; in other words, monopoly; and that as a con-
dition of permanent and wholesome competition along
with associated efforts, large public activity is required
in the supply of water. A recent writer uses these
words, and as I understand it, he simply voices the con-
sensus of opinion among experts. "In the vast majority
of instances, and over the larger portion of the arid
region, costly works will be required, and these can only
be supplied by some form of public enterprise. The
dividends upon the investment must be looked for, not
in the strong boxes of security-holders, but in the in-
crease of national wealth, in social progress and in
economic gains." If this statement is correct, we who
1 William E. Smythe on The Struggle for Water in the West.
Atlantic Monthly, November, 1900.
1
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:33:01 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
