management. I refer to the love of distinction in its
most familiar form,—the snobbish form, if you please to
call it so the desire to rise in the social scale. No
doubt, a monarchical or semi-monarchical state can use
a system of orders, titles, decorations, as in some degree
a substitute for salaries and wealth. But the substitute
is not comparable in efficacy to the desire for wealth as
a means of securing social station, and in any case it is
available in only very limited range under a democracy.
Hence it is probable that, as long as human nature
remains such as we know it, private ownership and management
of capital will conduce most to the efficient and
progressive conduct of production, and that the sphere.
of public management, while large absolutely, will be
limited in range and extent as compared with the accepted
and dominant régime of private property.
Nevertheless, there is obvious play for the love of distinction
in public affairs; and this not only in political
affairs as commonly thought of, but in those industrial
problems which are coming to be more and more interwoven
with political affairs. After all, public station is
alodestone of wonderful power. Not all men of administrative
capacity are open to its attractions, and not all have
the aptitudes necessary for participation in public affairs.
But in the class of business men who form, so to speak,
the officers of the industrial army, and from whom the
generals are recruited, there is a good proportion of ambitious
men for whom public service has a strong attraction.
They are drawn not only by the distinction and
possible fame of a public career; they are drawn also by
something better and higher. In enumerating and classifying
economic motives, we must not forget the altruistic
impulse. Whether or no it be innate, and whatever its
origin, its existence and influence are patent. Like the
other motives which we have considered, it is dominant
only in extreme cases. As some individuals are possessed
by a love of display, and others by a passion for domination,
so a few are consumed by devotion to the rest of