35
Present Position of the Doctrine of Free Trade
protection on wages. For years and years it has been
dinned into the ears of the American people that high
wages are the result of protection, or at least dependent
on protection; that the maintenance of a high standard
of living depends on the barrier against competing.
laborers of lower price, and that the workingman has a
special and peculiar interest in the system of high
duties. And yet I apprehend that here, too, the judg-
ment of the economists would be with virtual unanimity
the other way. The general range of wages in the
United States was not created by protection and is not
dependent on protection. The common talk about the
sacredness of protection as a means of uplifting the
workingman is mere claptrap.
No doubt there would be some difference in the way
in which the economists stated the grounds of this con-
clusion. The theory of wages is one of their debatable
fields, and some points are still to be settled. But for
the purposes of the present discussion, these differences
would not be material. By and large it would be agreed
all hands that the fundamental cause of high wages
is large productiveness of labor, and that so long as
such productiveness exists a large reward to workmen
will follow. The higher range of wages in the United
States is due to the country's rich natural resources, and
to the energy and intelligence with which these have
been utilized. It may be that in certain directions the
utilization of its resources has in some degree been has-
tened or made more effective by protection,-of this more
hereafter. It may be that in other directions this utiliza-
tion has been retarded and lamed by protection. But in
either case it is beyond doubt that, whether we had had
in the past complete free trade or the most unqualified
protection, production would have been more generous
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:36:42 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
