68
American Economic Association
A study of the economic forces now at work thus justi-
fies a reasonable hopefulness. The productive powers of
society are augmenting at such a prodigious rate that we
need no longer apprehend a decay of general prosperity
or of natural power. There is to be no further irruption
of the barbarian, because there will soon be no more
barbarians. There is to be no swinging back of the
pendulum of civilization, because under the influence of
the new economic forces only those nations can succeed
that understand how to utilize industrial capital, and
this comprehension implies an ever ascending stage of
civilization. There is to be no domination of each nation.
in turn over all the others, because of the inter-national-
ity of science and the impartial territorial diffusion of
industrial agencies. And within each nation, while the
rich are getting richer, the poor are not getting poorer.
The creation of a more equable, because a more perfect,
competition through the development of the system of
collective bargaining and the more adequate supervision
of monopoly; the recognition on the part of the legis-
lator that lasting prosperity depends not only on the
conservation and free play of capital but on the gradual
elevation of the laborer from a cheap man to a dear man;
the coming social control of competition itself in the in-
terests of a more enlightened and hence really freer
rivalry, all these will inevitably tend to secure to each
class in the community its proper share in the national
dividend.
This is not fatalism. This is not the preaching of
"hands off." Far from it! Man is a product of history,
but history is made by man. Modern economic forces
indeed provide new opportunities for all. But whether
the correct use be made of the opportunities depends on
the wisdom, the energy, the capacity of each individual,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:22:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
