18
American Economic Association
with an equally strong spirit of holding them strictly to
account, all this, I believe, no other government in the
world could have accomplished. The new and untried
operations have given scope for the best ambition of
trained and capable leaders, and such leaders have been
supplied by the bureaucracy, with its traditions of per-
manent tenure, continuous policy, honorable distinction.
Something of the same sort may be said of the state
railway system of Prussia. I do not propose to discuss
the difficult pros and cons as to that great case of public
management. It suffices to say that the management of
finances and of traffic has been conducted with a single
eye to what was believed to be the public interest,—no
doubt with some mistakes, but none the less with high
ability. The railway net has been systematically
and steadily enlarged; speculative building and plunder-
ing have ceased, and all favors to individual shippers,
all semi-corrupt machinations, have been abolished;
not least, the discipline of the enormous staff of work-
men has been strict, yet not unkindly. Even though,
there may not have been that degree of efficiency in
traffic operation which has been attained by the ablest
American railway managers, there remain achievements
which compel admiration. Certainly we in the United
States must envy the system of officialdom which has
succeeded in attaining results such as now seem hope-
lessly beyond the reach of our political machinery.
I do not mention these cases of success in administra-
tion for the purpose of holding them up for imitation in
our own country. Even in a survey of other than our
current American problems, their lessons are to be read
with caution. Democratic conditions are those that
primarily concern us; not only us, but the civilized world.
at large. For democracy will prevail more and more in
the future of all advanced countries. Such a career as
that of the British colonial administrator is unthinkable
in a self-governing community; and for this reason, I
may remark in passing, the hopes of those who look to a
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:29:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
