146
American Economic Association.
as a natural place to find aid and comfort. It is only
another formulation of the same proposition, a sort of
synthesis, so to speak, of these two elements, when we
say it is the outcome of a rising standard of education in
general in the community at large, and of an increasing
belief in the value of a special, technical, professional
education in all departments in which such training can
be of use.¹
The general tendency thus described has shown.
itself of late in all civilized countries alike; England,
France, Germany, Belgium, Austria, etc.
The new
Teaching University of London has recognized the
existence of this need in modern English society and
provided for its satisfaction by establishing a separate
and distinct faculty.2
The University of Leipsic has approved the experi-
ment by according a valuable and striking recognition
to this movement.3
Belgium has given the movement a legal status by
providing for schools of Commercial Sciences in two or
three of its universities, and by raising the Commercial
Institute of Antwerp to the rank of a University Faculty.*
1 Cf. 110.
10 in list of monographs, etc., relating to commercial
education appended to this article.
2 The University of London Act of 1898 and the Statutes made for
the University of London by the Commissioners appointed under the
said act (printed February 16, 1900), provide for a special Faculty of
Economics and Political Science (including commerce and industry).
This faculty in its original form consisted of ten members.
Cf. also Regulations made for the University of London by the
Commissioners under the University of London Act of 1898. (Printed
March 1st, 1900).
3 Cf. Erster Jahresbericht der Handelshochschule zu Leipzig.
Leipzig 1899.
Université
* Cf. École des Sciences Commerciales et Consulaires.
Catholique de Louvain. Louvain 1900. Also: Université de Liége,
Extraits des dispositions legislatives, etc. Liége 1900. (page 57).
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:30:46 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
