Population or Prosperity
The question of immigration.
13
In the decade ending 1910, but for immigration, the rate of
increase of the total population would have been much less instead
of somewhat greater than that of the preceding decade. But in
1910 there were over three million more foreign-born persons in
the country than were here ten years earlier. One fifth of the
increase in population consisted in foreign-born, and another fifth
of their children born in America. In each of the six years preced-
ing the census nearly a million immigrants arrived. All previous
records were exceeded. The continuing possibilities of immigra-
tion as a source of contributions to our population in the future
are enormous.² As migration is made easier by the spread of in-
formation and by the improvement of the means of travel, the lure
of a higher wage becomes more and more effective. There is no
limit to this motive, except the meager cost of steerage passage,
until real wages in America are leveled down to those of the most
impoverished populations permitted to enter our ports.
The current objections to immigration are mainly based on the
alleged evil effects to the political, social, and moral standards of
the community. It is often asserted that present immigration
is inferior in racial quality to that of the past. Whatever be the
truth and error mingled in these views, we are not now discussing
them. Our view is wholly impersonal and without race prejudice.
If the present immigration were all of the Anglo-Saxon race, were
able to speak, read and write English, and had the same political
sentiments and capacities as the earlier population, the validity
of our present conclusions would be unaffected.
The open-door policy, then and now.
When our policy of unrestricted immigration is thus opposed
to the interests of the mass of the people, its continuation in a
democracy where universal manhood suffrage prevails, is possi-
ble only because of a remarkable complexity of ideas, sentiments,
and interests, neutralizing each other and paralyzing action. The
American sentiment in favor of the open door to the oppressed
*The assumption that immigration constitutes a net addition to the popula-
tion is not in accord with the well known theory of Francis A. Walker. He
believed that immigration had the effect of reducing the birth rate of the
native born so greatly that the net increase was about what it would have been
without immigration. Let it suffice to say that this view seems to be a mis-
reading of the evidence and an exaggeration of a truth of limited application.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
