Government Control of Economic Life
15
weakness of wide and intense government regulation is its lack
of motive to take advantage of new conditions to further progress;
whereas the inherent strength of a system of individual initiative
is the presence of that motive.
If any of the proposed policies is to win final success in im-
proving the condition of any class of society, or of all classes, it
can do so only by increasing the sense of responsibility of those
directly affected. For those who have made any study of at-
tempts to improve human society through long periods must feel
very deeply "how great is the ignorance of the wise, the weakness
of the strong, the folly of the prudent and the helplessness of the
well-meaning." They will realize that we "cannot sweep away any
one thing without upsetting innumerable other things, good, bad,
and indifferent."
The adoption of the policies that we have been discussing may
mean a period of comparatively stationary economic life. In so
far as we clip the wings of motive we impede rapidity of motion.
Yet it may be well sometimes to do this. For abundance, irre-
spective of distribution, will not necessarily produce welfare.
What a nation may need may be an abundance sufficient for social
welfare according to definite ideals, even though it may not be so
great an abundance as with different ideals might be obtained.
It is true that progress in invention and discovery may still
go on if bureaucratic oversight should check industry. It will
do so, however, only if a sufficient margin of advantage is left
with the enterprising pioneer in the future as in the past. A
return to the intensive, minute, supervision over industry which
prevailed under the old mercantile system would defeat its own
purpose. Yet it is hard to tell where to stop when once we use
the arm of government for economic purposes. It is doubtful
whether in this country the public will endure the menace to liberty
involved in very intensive supervision. It is doubtful whether,
if the supervision were successful, we should be better off in the
long run, and we should have lost all the advantages that have
accrued to us under the great system of economic liberalism.
Although, then, there is good in the proposition for the exten-
sion of government activity into business, the field of its operation
must be carefully limited. Can we, in conclusion, lay down
briefly some of the limits within which it should be confined?
I venture to suggest, first, that reasonable welfare legislation,
as has already been remarked, is accepted by the American public
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:46:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
