8
American Economic Association
its nature. The chart for 1900 shows little alteration in its out-
line from that for a decade earlier. The increase of population in
the decade had been thirteen millions, but of these, eight millions
had been added to the urban and only five millions to the rural
population. In the following decade, from 1900 to 1910, the
increase was sixteen millions, of which twelve millions were added
to the urban and but four millions to the rural population. Divid-
ing our national history since 1790 into four periods, each of
thirty years, it is seen that in the first the density per mile
increased .7 of an inhabitant, in the second 2.4 inhabitants, in the
third 9, and in the fourth 14. Thus the increase in the number
per square mile has gone on at an accelerating rate, and was
twenty times as fast in the last as in the first period. As an index
of the demands which increasing population makes upon resources,
these figures are more truly significant than are the absolute num-
bers of people or the percentage of increase by decades; for they
show how many additional inhabitants must find employment,
materials, and food on the available area. This means greater
intensiveness of utilization. The cumulative additions are now
made on an area nearing, or already past, the point of maximum
advantage to the masses of the nation.
Disappearance of the frontier.
By 1890 the habitable agricultural area of the United States
had not been completely occupied, but the frontier of fertile lands
ready for man's use had at length been all but attained. Suddenly
was unmasked the true character of those great, uncolored areas
shown on the map. Deserts they are, for the most part, deserts
they must ever remain. Nature had no more free gifts to distrib-
ute to the prodigal children of America. She would grant still
some new arable fields, but only for the price of toil and patient
art. Our increasing population must thenceforth find its liveli-
hood in the more intensive cultivation of the settled areas. We
had been rapidly losing those economic advantages which had
distinguished us from the older, more densely settled countries. A
new ecomonic situation confronted our people.
Economic results did not long delay their appearance. In the
nineties of the last century the wave of popular prosperity at
length attained its crest. Some great forces lifting wages through-
out Christendom despite any counteracting effects from increasing
population seem at last to have spent themselves. Cheap food
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
