as proper, and that our various governments may concern themselves
with extending this without objection.

In the second place, government may properly attempt a
delimitation and regulation of industries which are monopolies
by nature. It may also segregate those, if any, which are likely
to be most serviceable to the public and to their owners when
treated as monopolies. Although there is room for difference of
opinion on details, the principle is generally accepted now that
the private enterprises which commonly go under the name of
public utilities are best treated as monopolies to be carried on
under proper reasonable supervision.

In the next place, the government may properly continue its
policy of compelling the trusts to dissolve into their component
industries and of requiring big business enterprises to resolve
themselves into units of the most efficient size. To accomplish this
purpose properly, the government should undertake an investigation
of what constitutes a unit of greatest efficiency in the more
common big businesses. Having determined this, the law should
prevent the organization of businesses which will exceed this most
efficient unit in size unless the advance in the arts makes it possible
to prove that some larger or different organization is better,
in which case the law should be adapted to the new conditions.
Again, the utmost publicity compatible with the rights of business
should be given to the transactions of corporations, whether
monopolistic or other. But it is hard to justify the minuteness.
of the inquiries which some of our commissions now propose into
various lines of business.

In the next place, the law may very properly forbid agreements
fixing prices by producers or distributors of goods. The law
may further properly provide a minimum standard of wages for
industries in which labor is obviously exploited. Still further,
few will object to reasonable increase in the burdens imposed
upon great aggregations of wealth for the general welfare, especially
when these aggregations of wealth have come from sources
that give them a large social element.

Finally, the attitude of our courts towards the character and
acts of corporations needs readjustment. There is some ground
for believing that from the point of view of the interests of society,
it was a mistake to give corporations the attributes of
personality. In any event, there is a demand that personal responsibility
for corporate acts shall be fixed upon the officers in