Economic Reconstruction
9
The weakness of the theory is its immaturity and its inefficiency.
The pork-barrel theory is not wholly false. It established for the
nineteenth century the truth, as we see it in America, that the
state exists for the sake of its individuals.
But the theory is a half truth. Nature may endow the indi-
vidual with rights, but she does not seem to burden the same
individual with duties. The duties are imposed on other persons.
But if rights proceed, not from nature, but from the state, then the
very act that grants a right imposes an equivalent duty in con-
templation of it. This we now have begun to recognize. The
equivalent duty is not only on other persons to respect the right,
it is on the person who has the right to vindicate himself.
This is the missing half of the pork-barrel theory. It was not
missed particularly in the nineteenth century, when those who did
not have rights of property could move west and get them. It is
missed in the twentieth century when those who are short on rights
are compelled to make terms with those who have them. And it
is this other half of the doctrine that has already begun, in the
nineteenth century, to force its way up and to offset both the
natural rights of the individual and the pork-barrrel theory of
the state.
At the very height of the victorious westward sweep of the doc-
trine of natural rights, the Supreme Court of the United States,
in the "Granger" railroad cases, went to an extreme limit in
denying it, for, according to that decision, the property of indi-
viduals affected by a public use rests, not on their natural rights,
but on their power to persuade the voters at the elections. Since
that time almost every class of property, in one direction or an-
other, has become affected by a public use and the election returns.
Along with these decisions have come those which established
the so-called unit rule of taxation. A public utility corporation
is no longer assessed merely on its physical property, such as
buildings, lands, and houses, but on the capitalized value of its
total earning power as a unit-on the market value of its stock
and bonds.
Likewise with the theory of assessment for special benefits.
This peculiarly American doctrine springs from the instinctive
practice of American democracy. When a local government-
a city, town, or village-constructs a public improvement, say
a street or a highway, the cost of construction may be assessed,
not against all of the taxpayers, but against those whose property
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:49:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
