Coyle, one of my former students, has estimated that four-fifths
of the one hundred and fifty or more fortunes in the United States
having incomes of over $1,000,000 a year have been accumulating
for two generations or more. It is interesting to observe that, al-
though the formulae expressing distribution by Pareto's logarith-
mic law are similar for the United States and England, the num-
ber of wealthy men at the top is two and a quarter times as great,
in proportion to population, in England as in the United States,
presumably because the number of generations through which
fortunes have been inherited are much great there than here.
Yet the man who wills property does so without regard to its
effect on the social distribution of wealth. In fact even from the
private point of view careful thought is seldom bestowed on the
solemn responsibility of bequeathing property. The ordinary
millionaire capitalist about to leave this world forever cares less
about what becomes of the fortune he leaves behind than we have
been accustomed to assume. Contrary to a common opinion, he
did not lay it up, at least not beyond a certain point, because of
any wish to leave it to others. His accumulating motives were
rather those of power, of self-expression, of hunting big game.
I believe that it is very bad public policy for the living to allow
the dead so large and unregulated an influence over us. Even in
the eye of the law there is no natural right, as is ordinarily falsely
assumed, to will property. "The right of inheritance," says Chief
Justice Coleridge of England, "a purely artificial right, has been
at different times and in different countries very variously dealt
with. The institution of private property rests only upon the
general advantage." And again, Justice McKenna of the United
States Supreme Court says: "The right to take property by
devise or descent is the creature of the law and not a natural
right a privilege, and therefore the authority which confers it
may impose conditions on it."
The disposal of property by will is thus simply a custom, one
handed down to us from Ancient Rome. It is no more inviolate
than the custom of the disposal of the body of the dead by burial.
Just as, in the interests of the living, we are substituting crema-
tion for burial, so-likewise in the interests of the living-we may
substitute a new for a traditional method of disposing of the
dead man's goods.
Numerous limitations of the right to will property do, in fact,
already exist in each of our states—some under common law, oth-