6
American Economic Association
of economics in the broader sense, now temporarily cultivated by
the moralist, one might remark that the concentration of atten-
tion upon subsistence and enjoyment rather than upon nation-
building, leads to an exaggerated insistence upon the rights of the
individual, whereas the concentration of attention upon nation-
building leads to a strong emphasis upon the obligations of the
individual. Therefore, there are two distinct types of leadership.
One type tells the people a great deal about their rights, their
wrongs, and their grievances, and very little about their obliga-
tions, except their obligations to themselves. The other type tells
them very little about their rights, their wrongs, and their griev-
ances, but a great deal about their obligations. The first type is
a logical product of the habit of mind which lays emphasis upon
the subsistence and enjoyment of the individual; the other of the
habit of mind which lays emphasis upon the importance of build-
ing a strong, durable, and expanding nation.
The fact that a change in the point of view makes such a vast
difference in the way the same thing looks to us will also explain
the change which frequently comes over a man when he has,
through popular leadership, come into a position of power and
responsibility. It has often been noticed that a man who has
achieved leadership through demagogic appeals to the masses be-
comes a different man when put into high public position. If he
does not, he does not last long, being repudiated even by the fol-
lowers who put him in. As a champion of those who think in
terms of their own subsistence and enjoyment, he was one kind of
man and things really looked to him in a certain way. In high
national office he is compelled to think in terms of the nation as a
whole. If he does not, he is such an obvious misfit that even the
sense of humor of the masses can not tolerate him. If he does,
many things which formerly looked black now look white and many
which looked white now look black. It is very easy for the con-
servative, on the one hand, to say that responsibility has sobered
him. He has not necessarily grown more sober; frequently he is
less so.
He is usually even more of a visionary, the difference be-
ing that he has got a larger vision. It is equally easy, on the
other hand, for those who have not yet achieved high office to say
that he has sold out to the interests. Generally he is less under
the domination of interests than he was before. The simple fact
is that he is forced to see things from a national point of view
rather than from a particularistic point of view; and the sheer
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:48:39 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
