Economists in Public Service
13
ers under statute law. There are, in particular, restrictions
against tying up property (except in charitable bequests) in per-
petuity. These restrictions have, undoubtedly, restrained the ac-
cumulation of swollen fortunes. There is no reason why we can-
not continue to add to such limitations so far as seems wise.
For instance, Rignano, the Italian economist, suggests making
the state co-heir of all bequests so that it will receive one-third of
the estate on the first descent, two-thirds of the remainder on the
second, and the residue on the third descent.
So much for the first great factor responsible for an undemo-
cratic distribution of wealth-the inheritance system. It has to
do with the transmission of fortunes from one generation to an-
other. The other great factor, the profit system, has to do with
the mushroom growth of a fortune in a single generation.
one.
When fortunes are made with prodigious speed, it is usually
wholly or chiefly through profits. Accumulation by compound in-
terest, though amazing in its possibilities after a fortune is large,
cannot in a single lifetime make a large fortune out of a small
Every "self-made" millionaire, so far as I know, became
such, if honestly, primarily through profits. Profits are the
chance part of distribution, the part which is the uncertain, and
therefore extremely variable, margin left after the more fixed and
known parts of the distribution-rent, interest, wages, and salar-
ies have been deducted.
Profits are, next to wages, the most important element of our
national income, comprising over a quarter therof and being more
important than rent and interest combined.
My query here is: May we not find ways, by legislation and
otherwise, of modifying more or less profoundly the present profit
system? I have in mind not only profit-sharing plans, plans for
coöperative producing, buying or distributing, and schemes for
allotting common stock to employees by which the worker may
feel a stake in the business in which he is engaged; but also, and
more particularly, possible participating by the public itself
through the government.
I am aware, of course, of the obvious and real objections to
such plans and I am not offering a solution of this problem, but
suggesting what seems to me a promising line in which we econo-
mists may seek a solution. Perhaps there are many different so-
lutions, varying according to circumstances. It may well be that
a place will always be left for pure private ownership and man-
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:50:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
