of the other two classes. The workman therefore is over-ready to
strike, shirk, or commit sabotage. The local public often cordially
hate a great railway like the Pennsylvania system or the Southern
Pacific at whose mercy they are, or a great corporation, trust or
bank, which they call an "octopus." From such hostility comes a
contest for political power and, too often, corruption. This cor-
ruption should not all be charged up to politics as such; for much
of it is due to private industry struggling for private profits in
disregard of public usefulness.
The government, representing the public, is, with all its faults,
in a better position than the private capitalist to underwrite great
industrial undertakings, both because its resources are greater and
because the chances of gains and losses in many different direc-
tions would tend, more fully, to offset each other. Government
underwriting of industry is thus in the last analysis simply a
species of social insurance.
It is interesting to observe that such social insurance as we are
now familiar with-workmen's compensation, health insurance,
etc. usually provides that the cost and management shall be
shared by the three parties interested, employer, employee, and
state.
Nor is such an extension of the principle of social insurance as
I am now tentatively suggesting so strange as it may at first ap-
pear. It is just what we have seen happen under the stress of
war. Early in the war the profit system by which the govern-
ment let out to contractors the making of munitions and other
supplies was found to be not only very expensive but to work very
badly. We therefore hastily improvised many kinds of govern-
ment regulation to meet the situation. The important point for
us to note here is that the government thus assumed some of the
commercial risks and insured others against them. To secure an
adequate wheat supply it guaranteed to the farmer the price of
wheat, while, at the same time, it protected the public against
"profiteering" in prices of bread. In taking over the railways it
guaranteed certain minimum profits. It assumed the most of the
risks in shipbuilding. It supplied a revolving fund to loan to es-
sential industries which would otherwise run the risk of not se-
curing needed capital. It put government officials in charge of
munition works which, under private management, were in danger
of failing to give the needed service to the country. It did all
these things clumsily; but it had to do something because private