commonly used to describe the policy more properly called econ-
omic liberalism. But economic liberalism is more than a political
platform or an economic formula. It is a system of culture that
has given character to the life of a great people for more than
two centuries. It is a superstructure erected on the principle of
personal liberty in religious and political matters. The 17th
century was an era of religious contest that resulted in the
establishment of ecclesiastical independence, which in turn carried
the rule of individualism to constitutional and political emanci-
pation. Once established in religion and politics, the principle of
personal independence found its way into economic conduct, and
the system was thereby made complete. Just as in its upbuilding
it was closely connected with personal liberty in other spheres of
life, so the present alleged breakdown of competition—the princi-
ple of personal liberty in economic life-and the alleged restoration
of the principle of authority finds its counterpart in the move-
ment towards church unity, uniformity of creed, the extension of
state as against local authority over education, the extension of the
federal principle in politics, and the widening censorship of morals.
The application of the authoritarian principle is being made in
these lines for reasons quite similar to those that are causing its
application in industrial affairs. The excesses of the personal
liberty system in morals, religion and literature, have produced
results that are shocking the sensibilities and shattering the ideals
of multitudes of people. Hence, the demand for control. In poli-
tics the extreme application of the principle of local government
has rendered equity, justice, and efficiency impossible in a multi-
tude of ways. Hence, the demand for state and federal control.
Under no system of government regulation of conduct, how-
ever extensive or intensive, has competition or personal initiative
been entirely absent, unless, indeed, under a system of slavery;
and at no time, under the most extended system of competitive
action, has it been possible to do away entirely with government
supervision and regulation. Even among the English-speaking
peoples in the past two centuries, when the laissez-faire aspects of
economic liberalism have seemed to predominate, it has not been
possible to get on without government regulation and supervision.
The reason is that the knowledge and resources underlying any
political and social system are constantly changing. Whether
the principle of personal liberty, expressed through competition,
or the principle of authority, expressed through government regu-