fresh from the inspiration of study in Germany, were eager
to convert American economists to a new and more optimistic
point of view.

The chief American economists of that time, however, regarded
the young enthusiasts just back from Germany as upstarts, meddlers,
and propagandists, unworthy of any standing in the hierarchy
of true economic science. Some of them, like my own revered
master, Professor Sumner, even declined to join the American
Economic Association for fear of lending aid and comfort to
a propaganda with which they were wholly out of sympathy.
It was doubtless in view of this strong feeling on both sides that
the Economic Association when formed was strictly limited as to
its functions. As our constitution says, its object is:
"The encouragement of perfect freedom of economic discussion.
The Association as such will take no partisan attitude, nor will it
commit its members to any position on practical economic questions.
"

A year and a half ago, after America entered the war, some of
our modern enthusiasts proposed that the Association should endeaver
to find, and do, its "bit" for the country. The objection
was promptly interposed that, as an organization, we had no
“bit” to do; for we were apparently prohibited by our constitution
from taking any "partisan attitude" or committing our members
to "any position on practical economic questions." But a
few months afterward, that is, a year ago, after much debate a
proposal to appoint a Committee on the Purchasing Power of
Money in Relation to the War was adopted, and later the Executive
Committee appointed a number of other committees on war
problems, including committees on War Finance, Foreign Trade,
Price Fixing, Marketing, and Labor. Some of these committees
have done work of great service to the country.
I mention these incidents in our history, as a text from which
to draw certain lessons. What I most wish to point out concerns
not so much the attitude of the Association as such but the attitude
of its members as individuals.

The conflict between those economists who were conservative
and those who were radical in regard to applying academic study
may be resolved into two separate questions or issues. The first
is: Should economists remain in academic seclusion, concerned
principally with pure theory and leaving the vulgar world to take
care of itself, or should they seek practical applications for their