Even before the war Germany's policy of foreign trade was
thoroughly selfish. Transportation and manufacturing interests,
backed by the German banks and the German army and navy had
gone into the foreign markets to expel the commerce of other
countries by fair means or foul, all for the national aggrandizement
of Germany.

In view of these facts it clearly behooves us just now to undergo
a searching self-examination lest this same fatal taint may
lurk in our own American economics which we have taken, in part,
from Germany. If we contrast German and English economics,
we cannot but be struck by the narrowness and selfishness of the
former as contrasted with the breadth and liberality of the latter.
The contrast is exemplified by the difference between the spirit of
"Free Trade" and "Protection." Though the English policy was
dictated in large part by the conviction that it represented England'
s own interests in the long run, the great fact remains that
these interests were not sought at the expense of other peoples
but on the principle that both parties gained by a trade, and in
the thought that nothing more than free, fair, open competition
ought to be sought. This doctrine of "live and let live" has in it
few seeds of war.

If, now, at the final peace negotiations, the German style of
economics is to dominate, the settlement will degenerate into a
race for position "and the Devil take the hindmost." If the Allies
should repudiate their own ideas, namely, the ideas of international
reciprocity in trade relations and of the open door, and
each should merely seek to secure all it could of territory, colonies,
trade concessions, special investment rights, exclusive ports,
coaling stations, canals, railway routes, and discriminatory tariffs,
the Peace table will turn into a gamblers' table, on which will be
dealt out the cards for the next great game of war, and, as often
happens after a war, the ideas and ideals of the conquered will
have made conquest over those of the conquerors.
America has a special opportunity, a special mission-to uphold
humanitarian and democratic economics. The very fact that
Germany once inspired us toward an economics in the service of
the state should spur us now to avoid the nationalistic perversions
of that idea which befell our German colleagues. Any American
economist who hereafter lends his talents to serve and inflame a
hoggish chauvinism, is betraying the high ideals and purposes of
America in this war. For instance, even if a more liberal tariff