The Economic Utilization of History
15
The economist has the further disadvantage that the sub-
jects of his study and experiment are men like unto himself with
opinions, emotions, and voices. Hence every experiment is ac-
companied by a babel of sound, which seems to confuse the whole
subject. The physiologist, working in his quiet laboratory, is
apt to think the very subject-matter of economics ill adapted
to scientific study. If the human body were the seat of a republic
in which all of the microbes that infest it and the ferments that
endanger it were vocal, the investigator would have to put wax in
his ears to keep his mind free from disturbance. Imagine the
bacilli of consumption and typhoid holding periodical elections to
see which should for the next four years control the state of health
of the patient, with a lot of insurgents in the shape of pyaemia and
dyspepsia striving, if not to govern, at least to hold the balance
of power!
Another equally serious defect lies in the inadequacy of our
records. The amount of economic material buried in the archives
of our states is enormous. The material buried in the records of
corporations, of labor unions, of voluntary societies, may be even
greater. The mere index of state economic documents which is
being compiled for the Carnegie Institution of Washington fills a
portly quarto for each one of the older states. The cream of
contemporary evidence bearing upon the history of Industrial
Society in the United States, recently published by Professor Com-
mons and his collaborators, fills eleven volumes. But in spite of
this vast material, we still have to contend with the imperfection
of many of our records and with the difficulty of accurate mensura-
tion. Professor Dewey, in his able presidential address of two years
ago, enlarged upon the inaccuracies of economic observation, and
all serious economists must recognize the truth of what he then
said. But it is the task of the economist to overcome difficulties,
not to shrink from them, and he can best do this by helping his
successors to obtain a trustworthiness in their material which is
not always available for him. It is encouraging that the federal
authorities, and the state governments as well, are relying more
and more upon trained economists to record economic facts in the
form of statistics and monographic studies. But we should re-
member that such studies are not the only agency of a governmen-
tal kind to which we must turn. Every law affecting economic
relations must be treated as an experiment, the recording of whose
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:29:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
