6
American Economic Association
restoring the competitive principle in industry, or frankly sup-
planting it with the principle of authority, finds some justifi-
cation, too, in the belief, not altogether ill founded, that the
economic evils of great industry have arisen in part from the
treatment of the modern form of the corporation by our courts
of law. They have given it in a measure the attributes of a
natural person, without imposing upon it the consequences of per-
sonal responsibility. Hence, it has frequently been impossible
to reach the misdeeds of individuals because of their attribution
to non-personal agents. Penal remedies and preventive measures
alike have been often ineffective to protect the public. Con-
sciousness of this evil is seen in the demand for holding directors
of corporations to personal responsibility for the acts of the
corporation, and in the movement for the disruption of “cor-
porations of corporations."
From all these causes arises the demand for government protec-
tion for the weak in industry; and some people appear to think
that unless the right to make a living is in a reasonable measure
provided, the next step may be an attack on the institution of
private property itself. In consequence, “today a great economic
movement is going on which aims at reorganizing the entire in-
dustrial system from the social standpoint." The call is for the
state to look after the conditions of living and work of workers,
the management of prices and output of large enterprises, or to
take them over and thereby free the many from a virtual eco-
nomic control of the few, and reëstablish, supposedly for all, a
proper standard of welfare.
An explanation of the establishment of economic liberalism as
a system, in the extreme form in which it has existed for more
than a century, is found in the abnormal condition of the four
centuries succeeding the discovery of America. Since that dis-
covery the life of the world has been abnormal in the sense that
it has been in a state of unstable equilibrium because of the ex-
istence of opportunities for personal initiative, personal gain, and
individual expansion under conditions that yielded larger rewards.
than ever before. Economic pressure in the old world could be
relieved by overflow into the new world. The great advantage
that came from this situation is now reduced by the substantial
occupation of this continent. The fact that our continent is, in
the present stage of the arts, substantially occupied, indicates
that the world is about to return to a more stable economic
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:46:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
