14
American Economic Association
when put to some academic test, and yet doing nothing to make
their lives either useful or distinguished, for lack of proper
incentive.
These parasitic members of the so-called “leisure class” should
be peculiarly useful specimens for economic study in our country,
because they are not under the social pressure of the feudal
system, inherited in the older countries of Europe from the time
when wealth meant land ownership, and land ownership of neces-
sity involved public duties. Many of this class in our country
walk our streets, eloquent but unconscious arguments for social-
ism, terrible examples for the moralist, living texts for sermons,
rich material for the problem novelist, but still comparatively
neglected by the economist, the sociologist, and the statistician.
We gather the budgets of workingmen, but not of club men; we
collect the statistics of involuntary unemployment but not of
voluntary idleness; our study of social conditions on the East
Side has not been extended to the West Side. And yet how can
we understand the causes of national decadence, that great and
perennial question of history as well as of practical politics, unless
we unflinchingly examine its phenomena during the growing
period?
Parasitism is, however, but a part of the general subject of
economic pathology, which has been altogether too much
neglected by economists in the past, and which can certainly never
be studied by the deductive method. Or, if we pass beyond the
strictly economic questions to those broader questions of social
policy, what vast materials have we in our country bearing upon
the mixture of races. What a splendid opportunity to test the
theories of the philosophical anarchist, who holds that the ills of
society are due to the law, and who may study in the history of
Alaska the effect of allowing a commonwealth to grow up almost
without law.
It is not possible at this time to enlarge upon these topics.
Some defects in our economic laboratory should, however, be
pointed out. In the United States experimentation is constantly
interrupted by the power of our courts to nullify laws. Thus
experiments may be overthrown on grounds which are quite
extraneous to their essence. It is as if a biologist were to sud-
denly find his laboratory invaded and wrecked by an over-zealous
anti-vivisectionist.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:29:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
