new capital. Private capital will not invest at the low rates of
profit allowed under government regulation. Rather should we
say, private financiers will not undertake to collect the needed
capital from investors unless they are allowed the speculative
values of future unregulated profits.

I need not enlarge upon the reasons for which government has
eliminated speculation in the railroad business. It was closely
connected with the effort to do away with discriminations. Private
speculation does not go where service is needed the most, but
where the returns are highest. Consequently the private financier
seeks the business of the great corporation or the great city; and
this, instead of mainly developing the country, mainly adds to
the values already developed.

The next step was inevitable: that of limiting the profits as a
whole by regulating the entire schedule of rates. And it is this
that stands in the way of obtaining the one or more billions of
capital needed every year in order to catch up with the growth
of the country.

Our experience in this respect is not different from that of
other countries. It has been mainly the fact that private financiering
could not get the capital needed for the national necessities,
whether military or industrial, that has forced other
countries either to subsidize railways, or to guarantee their stocks
and bonds, or to purchase them outright.
One or another of these methods we must look to as inevitable.
A general increase in freight rates offers no assurance either that
the new capital will be obtained, or, if obtained, that it will be
used where it is needed for the development of the country.
The same is true also if the railroads are subsidized or if interest
on the new capital is guaranteed. The main object is to
take out of the hands of the speculative financier the power to
decide where the new extensions shall be built, the new terminals
be provided, the new rolling stock be furnished. This is already
done in some states in a negative way by giving to the state commissions
power to veto issues of stocks and bonds, or to prohibit
duplication of lines. But it is not done in the positive and necessary
way of ordering new lines to be built where the country most
needs them. Whether the state subsidizes or guarantees or owns
the railroads, it must be the government that decides positively
where the money shall be spent.

But in all of these cases of proposed internal development, the