it really incapacitates him for work. The failure of young teachers
is mainly due to the overspecialization that thesis writing invites.
It takes years of hard knocks to realize that the facts of theses
and books are not good material for the classroom. Library economics
is a vice that hampers the growth of the science more
than the hair splitting logic of would-be reformers. We must
some time learn that real investigations cannot be carried on in
libraries no matter how complete they may be. We must also
learn that individual investigators no matter how well directed
seldom add new facts to our fund of knowledge.
The range of

social investigations is so great that only large institutions like
the Bureau of Municipal Research, the Russell Sage Foundation,
or the national government can really do effective work. Under
these conditions a thesis is a waste of time and a misapplication
of energy. It merely adds a new statement of old facts to a
market already overstocked. The young economist should be
drilled in effective presentation not in fact accumulation. His
home should be not in the library but in the classroom and when
sufficiently proficient to investigate, he should be loaned by the
university to the government, to local committees or to institutions
capable of handling social problems on a scale that commands
success. The university should furnish investigators but
should not become a mill for turning out small scale investigations
that excite ridicule instead of respect. If it encourages
bookmaking innumerable volumes appear that merely rearrange
old material and give a personal touch to old arguments and
viewpoints. Give men two dollars a page for writing articles
and a journal will have the same facts presented different ways
in each of its volumes. We want, however, net results not the
gross product. Measured in this way our books and journals
make a pitiable showing. And this will continue as long as
universities encourage book-making and economic journals pay
for articles and reviews. If these props to misspent efforts were
removed the number of books, articles and reviews would be
reduced to their normal proportion.

A scientific writer should have no other reward than what
comes from a love of work. The test of his growth in thought
is the reduction of the space he uses to present it. It is hard to
tell which is the worse evil: to have a scientific writer expand an