to induce them to use their powers. Aside from such considerations,
the weight of the argument is in favor of some form of
communism.

From the point of view, however, of those who are primarily
interested in nation-building, the weight of the argument is in
favor of distributing wealth in proportion to productive power,
regardless of ability to consume joyfully. In the first place,
they who have shown the ability to accumulate capital by consuming
less than their income are to be considered better guardians
of that accumulation than they who have not shown such
capacity or willingness. If it were turned over to those who have
been in the habit of consuming all they had, there would be a
strong probability that they would consume it and not conserve it.
In the long run, it is pretty certain that the nation which accumulates
capital most rapidly is the nation which grows most rapidly
in property and power. It is a rather noticeable fact that even
laborers tend to leave those countries where capital does not accumulate
and seek those countries where it does accumulate. So
likewise do scholars, writers, and talkers.
Again, to invest capital is to direct the productive power of the
community. They who direct that productive power wisely, that
is, they who invest in such a way as to make it yield a large product,
are economizing the productive power of the community. On
the other hand, they who misdirect that power, who invest unwisely,
who direct productive power in channels where it is not
needed in such a way as to produce less than is used up in the
process are wasting the productive power of the community. It
is much better for the nation that the accumulations of capital
be invested by those who can do it wisely and productively than
that these accumulations should be invested by wasters, that is,
by those who invest them where capital is not needed or in ways
which use up more than is produced. In the long run, it is safe
to say that the country which manages to put its accumulated
capital under the control of the wisest investors is the country
which will grow most rapidly in prosperity and power. To such
a country even laborers will desire to migrate, and so also will
scholars, writers, and talkers. In other words, it is better for all
of us, in the long run, that accumulated capital should be distributed
in proportion to investing ability than that it should be
distributed in proportion to the power of graceful, elegant, or
even jovial consumption. "To each according to his ability to