least appreciated passages in The Wealth of Nations. Apropos
of systems of land tenure the passage reads: "When land, like
movables, is considered as the means only of subsistence and en-
joyment, the natural law of succession divides it, like them, among
all the children of the family; of all of whom the subsistence and
enjoyment may be supposed to be equally dear to the father.
But when land was considered as the means, not of subsistence
merely, but of power and protection, it was thought better that it
should descend undivided to one." 1
Here was a clear recognition of one of the most important prin-
ciples of national policy. When a nation is thinking primarily of
its own growth, prosperity, and power, of its ability to meet the
conditions of life as a nation, its institutions and its policies may
be very different from what they would be if it were thinking
primarily of the consumers' satisfactions or of the enjoyment
which it might afford to its individual citizens. It may be added
that when its individual citizens themselves are thinking primarily
of the prosperity, power, and greatness of the nation they will
frame institutions and carry out policies very different from those
which they will frame and carry out if they are thinking primarily
of their own satisfaction as consumers, or of their own subsistence
or enjoyment. Moreover, if economists, however completely they
may be divorced from sentiment, are thinking in terms primarily
of national prosperity, power, and greatness, their conclusions on
many important questions will be very different from what they
would be if they were thinking primarily of consumers' satisfac-
tions, of subsistence, or of enjoyment. The economics of consum-
ers' happiness is one thing; the economics of national power and
greatness is another thing.
Adam Smith's remarks on primogeniture may or may not be a
case in point. We may or may not agree that primogeniture does
work better in the process of nation-building and expansion than
equal subdivision. As was remarked long ago, it was at least a