successful it must aim to protect the interests of wage
earners, the investing public, and the general public, alike. It
must not permit undue profit from excessive rates, or from exploitation
of labor. In this field, however, the limits and methods
of government intervention are being slowly worked out, although,
of course, with considerable friction and many jars.
The regulation of public utilities and industries of similar economic
character is an illustration in point.

Supervision may take the form either of inspection and publicity
of procedure, or of direct attempts to influence the form
of organization. The former method has been recommended by
President Taft's Railroad Securities Commission, and wherever
it has been applied its results have been good, even if they
have not cured all the evils. But we may reasonably ask for
more than this, at any rate in many cases. The prohibition of
what we may call interlocking directories, of stock watering, rebates,
price discrimination, and the holding of the stock of one
corporation by another, and the elimination or limitation of holding
companies, are some of the things that may well be
accomplished.

Aside from industries that are clearly monopolistic by nature
the whole aim of government interference should be to establish
conditions which will induce healthy competition. The government
should attempt to determine what constitutes, under existing
conditions, an efficient unit, or an efficient size, of a business.
It has been claimed for the trusts that they were more efficient as
producers and distributors than similar enterprises in the
same line.

I do not feel that this claim has been established,
and think that there are signs that it is largely untrue. The
economies of big business have been secured at an economic and
social cost that has not been fully evident or fully understood.
There is reason for thinking that the dissolution of the tobacco
trust has already recovered to society some valuable entrepreneur's
talent which was being suppressed by the discharge of clerical
duties under the trust, and has induced competition among those
of this order of business talent with some resulting shaving of
prices to the consuming public. Even if it were true that the
biggest business is the most efficient in the sense that the cost of
its unit output is lowest, it does not follow that we should permit
that system of industry to exist. For we can tolerate only that
system which, whatever its mere economic merits, is not likely to