practical eye to be either false or futile. It lost its usefulness
as a conservative argument in support of existing institutions, for
the best argument was the unmistakable progress of the masses.
It lost its hostile character to the champions of radical change.
American views on population.

American views on population were from the first unfriendly
to the Malthusian doctrine. It appeared in the earlier textbooks
of English origin or written under English influence, and as a
mere classroom abstraction it was given a small measure of
curious attention. But in any of its forms it involved an opinion,
adverse to an unrestrained increase of population, whereas the
conditions in America made such an idea appear false as theory
and harmful in practice. A growing population was favorable to
the interests alike of landowners, of active business men, of the
rival sections, and of the national government. There resulted
from this economic situation a peculiarly American optimism on
the subject. Density of population as an influence favorable to
the division of labor and to the economies of production in manufacture
was looked upon as in itself an efficient cause in increasing
the per capita income. One type of this optimism, exemplified by
Henry George, denied on principle that population ever could
increase too much. Another type, represented by Henry Carey,
held that population in fact was not likely to increase too much in
America. The national bias often led to crediting to American
character all of the benefits resulting from exceptional natural resources
combined with relative scarcity of population. This bias
and this reasoning still survive among us today.
Rapid settlement of the United States.

Students of American economic conditions are familiar with the
series of shaded charts in the Census volumes on population showing
by decades the extension of the settled area since 1790 and its
gradually increasing density. As one studies the earlier of these
charts one can see how the blank spaces on the maps of that day
must have aroused the imagination and the hopes of men. There
lay whole empires of land almost untenanted and calling to be used.
Decade by decade for a hundred years the frontier extended at a
hardly slackening rate while the density increased on the settled
area, until abruptly, about 1890, the process ended or changed