ANNUAL PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
291
If it is hard to divide the centuries into epochs it is still more
difficult to distinguish between parts of a period of twenty years
and yet there is enough difference between the first and second
halves of this period to give them a distinct character. The best
method of illustrating this difference is to examine the change
in our periodical literature. Twenty years ago the dominant
element was thought and theory, while at present description and
illustration have the first place. The theoretic discussions we
now have are by persons who earned their reputations in the
first epoch. The younger generation of economists have evidently
been turned in other directions. The same tendencies are mani-
fest in doctors' theses. I recall many young men who gained
standing by an essay of not more than thirty pages. They won
recognition by clear thought and a sharply defined thesis. To-
day they launch forth in a three hundred page pamphlet that
tires the reader with its massive collection of facts; and the
making of books is going the same road. No one seems willing
to stop short of the German standard by which prestige is gained
through bulky volumes that fill yards of library shelves.
The young doctor with a three hundred page pamphlet to his
credit has worked harder than his predecessor but he has pushed
forward neither the science nor the nation. The writers in journals
state the current problems of the economic world with great clear-
ness but they leave us muddled as to their solution. And book-
making has become an art of collection and restatement that
substitutes clippings and card catalogues for clear thought. Once
when I complained to a fellow writer of the difficulties of book-
making he volunteered to show me his method which was to
employ a clipping bureau to send him extracts from papers and
periodicals falling under each of the heads of his book. When
he wrote a chapter he read over these clippings and thus the book
came into being almost of itself. Another writer took a short-
hand reporter with him when he interviewed people familiar with
a selected topic and from this material created an acceptable
book. A more familiar illustration is that of college debaters.
A series of questions is a drag-net that will bring in the best of
the current thought and the questioner can be reasonably sure
to get what he wants with little work on his part.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:19:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
