"
to the student of his development but is of no consequence to
those who after him take up the task of creating economic litera-
ture. Malthus and Ricardo were likewise successful in their
contrasts but failed in their attempts at book-making. The
successful writers of to-day show this fact even more tellingly.
What could have been more important and effective than the
contrast between present and future goods and where is there
more of a failure than the book in which this gem is imbedded?
And if one may without offense pass a judgment on our greatest
living economist I will say that I have pitied him for the pressure
of false ideals which made him spend years to write a volume
of many hundred pages to express contrasts that could have
been more forcefully put in a twenty page pamphlet. No
one can write a four hundred page book that will stand. Telling
contrasts get an immortality that is denied books and the more
concise the expression the longer the life and the greater the
influence. The phrase "Economic Interpretation of History" is
worth more than all the books that seek to expound it. The
force of socialism lies in three phrases "Class Struggle," "Exploi-
tation" and "Surplus Value. No one who has mastered these
concepts need study Marx's diffuse and obscure argumentation.
Giddings' Sociology may be divided into two parts, the book and
the phrase "Consciousness of Kind;" and the phrase will outlive
the book. Our concept of the problems of population has been
radically altered by the phrase "Race Suicide." Many volumes
as erudite as Malthus' Principle of Population could not have
had the influence it has had nor thrown so much light on the
problems and tendencies of our age. So, too, The Abolition of
Poverty gives us a thought that volumes of description could
not express, for with one stroke it separates poverty from the
moral background with which it has been associated and shows
it to be an evil for which society is responsible. Poverty is
changed from individual depravity to mal-adjustment and
with this new viewpoint a world is opened up for enthusiasm
and sympathy to conquer. Hobbes' "State of War" Rousseau's
"Natural Man," Ricardo's "Cost Prices." Spencer's “Survival
of the Fittest" are vivid illustrations of the fact that phrases
are more important than volumes and have an immortality that
no scientific book can gain. Only when we recognize this