is a necessary corollary of the preceding position, but needs espe-
cial mention, because the use of the geometric mean has recently
been advocated. To use it, however, not merely would run counter
to the unvarying conviction of Congress that every major frac-
tion gives a valid claim to another seat, it would also result in
defeating the main object of the Constitution, which is to hold the
scales even between the small and the large states. For the use of
the geometric mean inevitably favors the small state. If it were
necessary to favor either group, the large states might be entitled
to more consideration in the House, because the small states are
favored in the Senate. But, fortunately, there is no need to favor
either.
As a question of pure mathematical theory, apart from all
consideration of motive and from all practical arguments about
the judgment of Congress, I find no unanimity of expert opinion in
favor of the geometric mean. I have laid the problem before two
meetings of the Mathematical Club at Cornell University, and,
although no vote was taken, I inferred from the discussion that
there was a preponderance of opinion in favor of the arithmetic
mean. Thus the theoretical arguments of statists and mathemati-
cians point to the same conclusion to which Congress had already
been brought by other considerations and establish my thesis, that
the method of major fractions is the correct and constitutional
method of apportionment.
The House of Representatives is now more than six times its
size before the first census and four times its size immediately after
that. Within the half century since the only law passed with a
design to check its growth was last put in force, it has increased by
more than four fifths. While it has been thus expanding, no simi-
lar change, I believe, has occurred in any other representative
assembly in this or any other country, with perhaps the exception
of the lower House in Austria, where the conditions are unique.
If its present rate of growth should continue for another cen-
tury, the House would include about 1,400 members. Such an
expansion is unlikely and perhaps in the interest of efficiency the
increase ought soon to slacken or to stop. From this point of
view the change made in 1911 gains new importance. It is now
possible for Congress to prescribe, in advance of an approaching
census, how many members the House shall contain, to ask the
Secretary of Commerce to prepare a table apportioning just that