The National Point of View in Economics
9
regulates business and industry, you will name also the country
which most rigorously regulates speech.
These may be mere coincidences, but they are so numerous as
to create a presumption that the nation that definitely abandons
a laissez-faire policy with respect to one branch of human activity
is not likely to preserve it with respect to all others. Talkers may,
of course, easily invent reasons for placing the business of talking
in a different category from other businesses. I could state a
dozen such reasons myself, and an equal number to the contrary.
But the practical statesman and man of affairs, whatever he may
have said in a political campaign, is singularly indifferent to these
theoretical distinctions when he faces a real situation.
Please do not understand this as an argument for a laissez-faire
policy with respect to production, consumption, or speech. It is
as much against as for such a policy. The important point is
that whatever policy is pursued with respect to one is likely also
to be pursued with respect to the others. We are already be-
ginning to hear about the changed attitude of governments toward
industry brought about by the war in Europe. Some are specu-
lating as to the results of this changed attitude after the war is
over. Let us not close our eyes to the fact that the change in
the attitude of those governments toward consumption, toward
speech, and toward everything else which affects the national well-
being is quite as great and quite as striking as the change in their
attitude toward industry. They have found that vicious habits
of consumption and hostile expressions of opinion are quite as
dangerous to the well-being of the nation as bad business methods.
When we begin to think in terms of nationality we shall all dis-
cover the same thing.
The statement that one function of government is to protect
the weak against the strong is another product of the particular-
ist point of view. Since most of us are weak rather than strong,
we doubtless feel that we should get more individual advantage
from a government which followed that rule than from one which
did not. Even those who occupy a middle position between the
weak and the strong feel that they have more to fear from the
strong than from the weak; therefore they would be inclined, if
they sought their own advantage, to cast in their lot with the
weak. But if we are thinking not primarily how much profit we
of this generation can get from the government, but how the na-
tion may grow strong and endure, it would seem rather absurd,
would it not, to protect the weak against the strong? To protect
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:48:39 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
