292
THE ECONOMIC BULLETIN
There are writers whose work deserves commendation and yet
the art of popularizing is so prominent that the fuller view of the
earlier epoch is lost sight of in the struggle for immediate results.
A theoretic writer can no longer gain through his work the com-
manding place that would have been given him even a dozen years
ago. Not only has he in this way lost prestige but his work is more
impersonal than it was, so much more so in fact, that he scarcely
ever derives personal advantage from it. The popular speaker
and writer are quoted everywhere and thus gain a name on which
position and income depend. The theorist however finds few
readers and his contrasts when fresh and striking are appropriated
by popular writers without credit. A man who worked for years
on an important topic finally brought out a book that set off his
thought by a brilliant contrast that really contained its essence.
When this was first used by an editorial writer he gave full credit.
Soon editorials by the score appeared in other papers which gave
the new thought and expounded it by means of the new contrast
but no credit was given to its author. These writers had apparently
read the first editorial but not the book and cared more for mak-
ing an impression than for justice.
In one way the author should be greatly pleased since the end
for which he worked was so easily attained. But in so far as a
personal element was a motive he gained less than if he had been
the author of one of the editorials based on his book. Books
now drop out of sight in a few months; often they are dead before
the reviews of them begin to appear. But their contrasts and
telling phrases live on and are pushed over into the popular
consciousness in a thousand indirect ways that make them effec-
tive and often as immortal as they are impersonal. To-day the
popularizer is so close on the track of the thinker that his book
is made a part of literature before it is dry from the press. To
think clearly is to be altruistic. Honors and rewards come only to
those who by pen or speech pass along to the public the books
and essays it will not read. And the professor, like the writer
and speaker, gets his promotions by what he appropriates. Econ-
omists are not free from tendencies that dominate elsewhere.
And hence it is that each year we pay less attention to clear
thought and more to its expression.
Such considerations warn us of the difficulties economists
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:19:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
