himself and without involving him in any legal or moral liability.
He cannot, it is true, like Herod, kill off the babies for the sake
of watching the effect upon population or wealth, but society is
constantly creating by law conditions which lead to the slaughter
both of innocents and of adults, by preventable disease and acci-
dent. In many cases this needless increase of the death rate is
brought about, as it was in the time of Herod, because our office
holders are more intent upon keeping their jobs than upon earning
their salaries, and care more for politics than for sociology. We
have in a republic no despot to force his brass into circulation,
but what no despot would dare do to the people, the sovereign
people cheerfully do to themselves. When our country was
divided by a civil war, the hostile sections, though bitterly opposed
to each other in most questions, were yet alike in that each decreed
to make the government's paper equal to the people's gold, and
tried over again the experiment of an inflated currency which had
been tried by Tughlak, the son of Muhammed, and by many
others after him.
Thus we not only have experiments tried on a large scale in
modern states, but it is fair to say that, the more democratic the
country, the more ready on the whole it is to try experiments on
itself. Thus economic experimentation is not only possible, but
it is so common that it is hardly recognized as experimentation,
and the superabundant legislative activity of so many of our
advanced and radical commonwealths testifies to the mass of
work of this kind which is being performed gratuitously for the
economist.
There is a second argument against the possibility of economic
experimentation, which is perhaps more serious than the one
which has been considered, and it deserves more detailed treat-
ment, since it has had the support of eminent economists and
logicians. We are told that, even if experiments are tried by
modern governments, they are tried under such conditions as to
have no scientific value and to permit of no convincing conclu-
sions. This was the view of John Stuart Mill, at once a great
logician and a great economist, and it has been accepted by many,
if not most, of his successors. Mill, after enumerating the four
different methods of experimentation which are possible, con-
cludes that no one of them is adapted to the social sciences.
Take, for example, the methods of differences and of concomitant