production. Our business men and lawyers have been peculiarly
fertile in evolving new forms of industrial organization. Our
public service corporations are testing new methods of adjusting
their charges, until the study of rates has become almost a science
by itself."

Likewise the wage receivers are trying all kinds of methods of
improving their own condition. Every strike may be said to
represent an experiment relating directly to the important question
of economic theory: what determines the rate of wages.
In all of this experimentation we have the great advantage in
our country of carrying it on under conditions described by that
favorite phrase of the economist, "other things being equal." By
this I do not mean that we have been able to try different things
under absolutely identical conditions such as might be created in
a laboratory, but, as compared with the conditions under which
economic history has developed in other parts of the world, we
may claim for our own country that these experiments have been
conducted under three exceptionally favorable conditions:
(a) They fall within a limited period, so that no great or fundamental
changes have taken place in the cultural standards of
civilization or the mores of the people, such as characterized the
change from the mediaeval to the modern period in Europe.
(b) The experiments have been carried on within an area of
political uniformity, so that, although there are great differences
in latitude and longitude, climate and soil, between the different
parts of our country, yet the general legal and social environment
is very nearly the same.

(c) These experiments have been carried on among a people,
which, if not homogeneous in its ethnic makeup, is at least remarkably
uniform in its heterogeneity. Our country is like a good
mince pie; any one slice contains many different ingredients, yet
specimens from different parts of the whole are made up of
nearly the same ingredients, varying mainly in their relative
prominence. Thus everywhere we have the common basis of the
English language and, with the exception of Louisiana, of English
law.

Everywhere, too, we have a greater or less admixture
of different European races, of Africans, and occasionally of
Mongolians. While, of course, the percentage of the different