which would be necessary for this kind of an educational system.
To the federal government was assigned when it was organized
many of the most fruitful sources of revenue. To the states were
left many of the most burdensome items of expenditure. The
nation may, by a national revenue system, raise certain funds
far more easily, with less burden to the individual and less burden
to industry, than they can be raised either by the state or the community.
A reasonable distribution, therefore, of public burdens
between the state and the nation would call for such a readjustment
of the burdens of this educational function conceived in this larger
way.

The locality should do its part; the state should do its part;
the nation should do its part, toward raising funds necessary to
maintain this comprehensive system of national education.
There is another reason, an important one too, why the nation
should make its contribution to this educational function; and
that is that as education is in essence a national function, so
it ought to find a corresponding external recognition of that fact
in the national budget. In this way education becomes the subject
of national discussion. It assumes gradually the relative importance
which it ought to occupy as a national issue in the minds of
men. And when the subject of education and what the nation
ought to do for it becomes the topic of congressional debate, and
when once a year the question is raised how much the federal
government is contributing or ought to contribute towards this
purpose, when the question is discussed how efficiently this money
is used, we gradually secure from the public that attention to the
importance of education as a fundamental national issue which
can come in no other way. In England, France, Germany, and
now in all the other civilized countries including Russia, education
has become a national issue. The platforms of great political
parties are carefully examined by the thoughtful portion of the
community, to see whether they propose to provide adequate
assistance for the support of education; and in Germany practically
the same thing is effected by the fact that Prussia is so
overwhelmingly the German Empire that the discussion of educational
questions in the Prussian diet attract almost the same
attention that they would in the Imperial diet itself.
Now one may raise the question, what is a practical plan, and
what do you propose as a positive concrete step which may be
taken in this direction?
