Population or Prosperity
17
tant aspect of the question. The law against contract labor does
not check the great stream of those guided by friends to a "job."
If immigration were suddenly stopped in a period of normal or of
increasing business, wages in many occupations would at once
rise, and that, without the aid of strikes or arbitration. This
would affect most those occupations which now present the most
serious social problems, in mines, factories, and city sweat shops.
In some small measure the war in the Balkan States, by recalling
many men for service, has had this influence. Organized labor
thinks most of these immediate effects. Commonly labor's protest
is expressed in terms of the untenable “lump of labor" theory of
wages. "Every foreign workman who comes to America" is be-
lieved to take "the place of some American workman." The error
in this too rigid conception of the influence of new supplies of
labor need not be argued before an audience of economists. But in
the light of the doctrine of population there is no mistaking the
influence of continually increasing numbers in gradually and per-
manently depressing the whole plane of wages. It is generally
assumed that when the immigrants and their children become
Americanized and raise their standard of living their presence no
longer has any effect in depressing wages below what they other-
wise would have been. Indeed it is tacitly assumed that the law of
increasing returns operates as population becomes denser, and
that the general prosperity is enhanced by the mere growth of
numbers. This idea was measurably true so long as national
growth was one of extension into unoccupied areas, and the
average density of population was low. It ceases to be true
whenever the ideal point of equilibrium between population and
resources has been attained. The territorial distribution of immi-
grants, their training in the English language, and their adoption
of American standards of living, can not change a mathematical
fact.
Conditions of progress.
John Stuart Mill, in discussing the future of society when popu-
lation might be expected to have ceased increasing, employed an
already current term, the "stationary state." The phrase is
hardly felicitous for, as he explained, this does not mean a society
stationary in the industrial arts and in mental, moral, and social
culture. Indeed it was just such a condition of a stationary
population that he deemed the ultimate ideal when once that de-
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
