14
American Economic Association
of all lands is a part of our national heritage. The wish to share
with others the blessings of freedom and of economic plenty is the
product of many generations of American experience. The open
door policy had partly a political basis: a growing population in a
young and sparsely settled country gave greater security on the
frontier of settlement and greater strength against foreign ene-
mies. The policy had, however, mainly an economic basis: land
was here a free good on the margin of a vast frontier. Most
citizens benefited by a growing population. Let it not be accounted
cynicism to recognize in this national self-interest the source of a
generous sentiment toward the incoming stranger. That senti-
ment, truly generous, now lingers after its real cause has disap-
peared. It impels to an unthinking liberality to the alien while
sacrificing the heritage of the workers of America; it makes the
citizen with humane ideals the misguided ally of commercial greed.
The open door policy is vain to relieve the condition of the masses
of other lands. Emigration from overcrowded countries, with
the rarest exceptions, leaves no permanent gaps. Natural increase
quickly fills the ranks of an impoverished peasantry. If America
with futile hospitality continues to welcome great numbers from
countries with low standards of living, she can but reduce the level
of her own prosperity while affording no permanent relief to the
overcrowded lands. Nations under bad governments must find
relief through the reform of their own political conditions. Lands
whose people are in economic misery must improve their own indus-
trial organization, elevate their standards of living, and limit
their numbers. If they go on breeding multitudes which find an
unhindered outlet in continuous migration to more fortunate
lands, they can at last but drag others down to their own unhappy
economic level.
The pride of immigrants and of their children, sometimes to the
second and third generations, is another strong force opposing
restriction. Immigrants, having become citizens, are proud of the
race of their origin, and resent restriction as a reflection upon
themselves and their people. One may admire the loyalty and
idealism here manifested, while regretting that these sentiments and
arguments serve to distract attention from the real problem to
minor and irrelevant incidents.
Public welfare or private profits.
A strong commercial motive operates in the most influential
class of employers in favor of the continuance of immigration.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
