The National Point of View in Economics
5
be considered as depriving the other sons of their rights if the
sword went intact to one, instead of being divided up. That
would be so obviously sensible that no one would be likely to cham-
pion the rights of the disinherited sons. But if, instead of a
weapon or a tool to be used in nation-building, the sword were
thought of as an object of pleasure, a consumer's good, the case
would be different. They who think in terms of consumers' satis-
factions are uniformly rather strenuous in their insistence upon
their full share. The same rule which seems so obviously sensible
from the other point of view becomes obviously and wickedly un-
fair and stupid from the new point of view. The whole difference
is in the point of view.
There is another illustration equally clear and to the point, and
also dignified by an eminent and highly respected authority. It
is found in the story of a certain ruler who entrusted sundry pieces
of money to his servants, to one five, to another two, and to an-
other one.
He who had received one piece of money did not use
it but hid it away.
When the ruler returned he ordered that this
one piece of money be taken away from the man who had not
used it, and that it be given to the one who had used his five so
productively as to gain another five. Now, I venture to say that
no one who thinks of pieces of money as sources of subsistence or
enjoyment ever understood this story or ever will so long as the
world stands. But one who thinks of pieces of money as tools to
be used in nation-building, finds the story so obviously sensible
as almost to preclude the possibility of discussion. Such a person
can see no reason for inventing the absurd theory that pieces of
money did not mean what they obviously did mean, but spiritual
qualities instead. He would know that it is a waste of good tools
to have them hidden away, and that in the interest of society or
of the nation they ought to be taken away from the one who thus
wastes them and given to the one who shows his capacity to use
them productively. However, to one who thinks only or primarily
in terms of consumers' satisfactions, and to whom pieces of money
are merely sources of consumers' satisfaction, it would seem mon-
strously unjust to take away from the poor man the one source
of satisfaction which he possessed and give it over to the rich man
who had ten already. The same rule, again, looks very different
from the two points of view. It is the point of view that makes
the difference.
If one were permitted to step outside the field of economics in
the narrower sense, and make an observation or two in the field
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:48:39 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
