Population or Prosperity
15
From the beginning of our history, proprietors and employers
have looked with friendly eyes upon the supplies of comparatively
cheap labor coming from abroad. This has been a potent factor
in many of our political and economic policies. The early comers
to America strove in every way to obtain a cheap labor force
through immigration. Large numbers of immigrants or of their
children have been able soon, in the conditions of the times, to
become proprietors and employers. Thus was hastened the peo-
pling of the wilderness. The interest of these classes harmonized
to a certain point with the public interest; but likewise it was in
some respects in conflict with the abiding welfare of the whole
nation. It encouraged much defective immigration from Europe
and led to the fateful introduction of slavery from Africa. A
small planter class, heedless of the future, provided for its own
ease, but it left to posterity a dark and bloody heritage which
still remains the greatest threat to the American democratic ex-
periment.
The immigration from Europe has furnished an ever changing
group of workers moderating the rate of wages which employers
otherwise would have had to pay. The continual influx of cheap
labor has aided in imparting values to all industrial opportunities.
A large part of these gains have been in the trade, manufactures,
and real estate of cities as these have taken and retained an ever
growing share of the immigrants. Successive waves of immigra-
tion, composed of different races, have been ready to fill the ranks
of the unskilled workers at meager wages. This continuous inflow
has in many industries come to be looked upon as an indispensable
part of the labor supply. Conditions of trade, methods of manu-
facturing, prices, profits, and the capital value of the enterprises
have become adjusted to the fact. Hence results one of those
illusions cherished by the practical world when it identifies its own
profits with the public welfare. Without immigration, it is said,
the supply of labor would not be equal to the demand. It would
not at the present wages. Supply and demand have reference to a
certain price. At a higher wage the amount of labor offered and
the amount demanded will come to an equality. This would tem-
porarily curtail profits, and other prices would, after readjust-
ment, be in a different ratio to wages. Such a prospect is most
displeasing to the commercial world, quick to see disaster in a dis-
turbance of profits, slow to see popular prosperity in rising wages.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
