I remember the satisfaction I once had when a fellow economist
said "the library is our laboratory." I then thought that our
sources are the accumulated records of past epochs and that what
the past tells about the present is of more value than what the
present tells of itself. If, however, the current economic events
are of more importance than the defective records of the past piled
on library shelves an economist has no business to be in a library
nor to send his students there except as it contains and classifies
current literature. He has less use for a card catalogue of musty
books than for one of events, editorials and articles of the passing
year. We need fresh observations, not fine arguments; we need
clear contrasts not the accumulation, arrangement and restatement
of antiquated obsolete data. No fact is valuable to the
economist unless it is also valuable to the journalist who summarizes
events, the editor who comments on them and the
reformer who uses them. No argument is good in a book or in a
classroom unless it would convince the million readers of a daily
paper and could find place in the campaign book of a political
party. The book goes nowhere unless it goes to the reader of
papers and magazines. Thought is no longer in isolated compartments
affecting only particular persons or classes. Its waves are
like effects of a pebble thrown into the ocean. If it moves the
particles it hits, it moves every other particle no matter how distant.
If we move our students we move the world. If we fail
to move the world we deceive ourselves if we think our students
have been moved by the specialized knowledge we hurl at them.
There is but one real world and whoever would exert an influence
must be in it. Let the historian, the sociologist and the student
of literature have the library and all the gems they rescue from
its dark corners. Economists should work in the open and get
their inspiration from the struggle and evolution which passing
events reveal; for where change is there should also the economist
be.

So long as economic scholarship is associated with library
research we may expect theses to continue as a test of economic
proficiency. Second-hand data and antiquated material thus
get a place they do not deserve. The student is turned away
from real life and often acquires a prejudice against it. A three
hundred page thesis not only does not fit a man to be an economist: