given contract, or to refuse to do so, as the one result or the other
promises him more advantage. The fact that one of the parties
enters into a contract that he knows will be generally disadvan-
tageous to him because he feels that if he refrains from entering
into it he will be worse off than if he accepted it, fulfills neither the
idyllic suppositions of the economists nor the legal conception of
freedom of contract.
In the first flush of individual liberty, population was small,
capital was limited and largely held in individual hands. Under
the then existing circumstances the facilities did not exist for com-
bined action or for freedom of contract. Nor was any attempt,
in fact, ever made to bring within the area of freedom of contract
any considerable portion of the population living at any one time
in any community. First, freedom of contract arose in the days
when the major portion of mankind was not free in the sense implied
by the term freedom of contract. They were living in a condition
of semi-freedom, or status, more or less free according to our
standards, but nevertheless restricted in many ways.
In many
communities, even the most advanced, a large part of the popula-
tion were in actual slavery. They of course were excluded.
Women, minors, idiots, and many other classes were shut out from
this sacred precinct.
But it was not until the days of capitalistic industry and the
enormous surplus resulting therefrom, with the consequent class
cleavage and the creation of the great wage-earning, non-propertied
classes, that we began to discover that the majority of the per-
sonally free adult males, because of economic conditions, were quite
as unfree economically as many of those whose personal freedom
was limited by law.
Furthermore, it may be questioned whether or not the mere
growth of fixed capital, in the absence of all other considerations,
does not fix a definite limit to the effectiveness and beneficence of
competition. I take it that the Ricardian doctrine of competition
rests fundamentally on the belief that when two competitors
attempt to supply the same market with a given commodity the
price of that commodity will finally be cut to the point at which
the most efficient can still sell at a profit, while the less efficient
will find that price unremunerative. It further assumes that when
that condition is reached the less efficient can, and will, withdraw
his capital and labor and apply them to some other industry which
promises at least the average reward or profit prevailing in the