will always play an important role in human affairs, but it
remains beneficent only when society, acting through a state
stronger than the strongest individual or organized group of individuals
acting together, makes the rules of the game and sees to it
that pigmies are not permitted to fight with giants.
To those who have watched the inability of the laboring classes
to compete individually without results disastrous to them and
through them to the public in general, it must be plain that could
our present legal organization be maintained for a few generations
our attempts at unrestrained competition under it would mean
practical if not legal slavery for the non-propertied classes of
today and their descendants. Under such circumstances, if the
depressed classes were unable to throw off the yoke by force civilization
would die for lack of sustenance. For the experience of
mankind shows that no subject population limited to a given territory
can, or will, produce enough economic goods to support or
sustain itself. If, under such a condition of subjection the population
should become stationary, and peace could be maintained, we
should then have all the conditions for a civilization based on
slavery, and able to continue its existence by means of forced labor
alone.³

Our legal system of private property, with its present connotation,
has its chief defense in the doctrine that private property
is necessary in order to give a sufficient motivation for economic
activity and production on a large enough scale to maintain a
progressive or even stationary population. But with the exhaustion,
or appropriation, of our natural resources to a point
where, at present, one cannot avail himself of such resources unless
he possesses considerable capital, it appears that, if our present
legal organization is to continue, the hope of ever bettering their
status will soon fade from the consciousness of the whole working
population. When the laboring people obtain sufficient information
of the actual conditions, the motivation to industry offered by
the chance of owning private property will no longer influencę
them. And as these classes already constitute the overwhelming
majority of population in every industrial nation, this argument
for the existence of private property defeats itself; for if the hope
of acquiring private property be the chief motive for economic production,
and, if the great majority of our people are shut out from
such hope, production must cease unless it is kept up under some
Mill's Principles, Ed. Ashley, p. 989.
