10
American Economic Association
motives for the change were a desire to end the rapid increase in
the size of the House of Representatives and a desire to withdraw
a vexatious and contentious question from the arena of public dis-
cussion. The way was not then open, as it is now, for accomplish-
ing either purpose if the method of an assumed ratio was retained.
There are two serious difficulties with the results of the Vinton
method. It often results in a major fraction which does not en-
title the state to another representative; it sometimes results in two
consecutive tables in which the total size of the House differs by
one, but in the larger House the number of members from some
state is one less. The latter possibility first came prominently be-
fore Congress in the tables prepared in 1881, which showed that
if the House had 299 members Alabama was entitled to 8, but if
it had 300 members Alabama was entitled to only 7. Hence this
anomaly has come to be known at the “Alabama paradox." When
Congress has faced the rejection of one or more major fractions
under the Vinton method, it has assigned new members for those
fractions in defiance of the method's requirements. When it has
faced the Alabama paradox, it has avoided the difficulty by choos-
ing another table from the series. Thus neither of these anomalies
has occurred in any actual apportionment.
Under the system of an assumed ratio the number of representa-
tives in a state depends upon the initial ratio and the population
of the state, and not at all upon the population of any other state
or of the country. Thus, if serious errors had crept into the
enumeration of any state and been discovered after an apportion-
ment law had been passed, and if the method of an assumed ratio
had been used, the errors would have affected only the state in
which they occurred, but if the Vinton method had been used they
might have affected other states.
The only way in which the method of major fractions in the
form used in 1840 and revived in 1900 failed to meet the needs
of Congress was that it could not furnish for the scrutiny of
members a series of tables, each apportioning one more repre-
sentative than its predecessor. The improvement introduced in
1910 resulted in removing that difficulty. To explain the inno-
vation we must return for a moment to events in the winter of
1900-1901. When the Census Office began the preparation of
apportionment tables from the figures of the Twelfth Census, it
decided to employ all the methods which had ever been used. For
this purpose two sets of tables were constructed, one following the
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:47:47 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
