4.2
American Economic Association
advancing a plea for the piling up of more facts. Rather,
if it were possible, would I destroy a large part of the
so-called facts the existence of which is in reality an
obstacle to progress. What we want is accurate facts.
Many a monograph is non-usable because the observer
was not trained in observation, did not perceive with clear
vision, and did not record his data with precision.
A host of students are now engaged in the field of de-
scriptive economics. Some are disposed to think that too
many have been diverted into this field. The mistake of
these ardent workers is not in entering upon this work,
but rather in failing to recognize that it requires a spe-
cial preparation,—that it has an art of its own, to observe,
measure, and separate the phenomena which constitute
the object of their research. Possibly the economist
thinks that he is not concerned with these observational
workmen; but we have a practical situation to meet.
Many are not gifted to engage in abstract reasoning, and
others are not attracted to devote their energies to this
field of intellectual activity. It is impossible to check
this interest, but is it not possible to make the work of
these enthusiastic recruits more effective?
Our subject, however, has another aspect which con-
cerns the public interest rather than the methods of
pedagogical instruction. As has already been observed,
there is actually existing an enormous amount of obser-
vation in the field of economic activity. The scope of
economic facts is so vast, the data are so scattered, and
the analysis of these facts is so complex, that it cannot be
expected that the task of observation will be carried on by
individual enterprise alone. Much of it is assumed by
government or subsidized endowment. This has been so
in the past, and must be increasingly so in the future. If
this be true, the only way to secure a scientific supervision
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:25:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
