guarantee that there would be only one drone in the same family.
It at least made it necessary that the younger sons go out into
the world and shift for themselves. They were not encouraged to
hang around home waiting for the old folk to die in order that
they might get a share of the estate. They had to go where there
was land and build estates of their own, if they wanted them. This
may have had something to do with the expansion of the English
race and of the British Empire. On the other hand, in those old
countries where the Code Napoléon had been in force there has
been little expansion. Relatively speaking, there has been a de-
cline in power both economic and military.
And yet, to anyone who thinks mainly in terms of consumers'
satisfactions, of fair play and equal rights in matters of enjoy-
ment, primogeniture seems a monstrous iniquity, and the equal
subdivision of land among all heirs is the only system which is
even tolerable. Of course there may be those who realize that it
is better for the individual to belong to a prosperous, powerful,
and expanding nation than to an unprosperous, weak, and con-
tracting nation. This consideration might lead them to surrender
many consumers' satisfactions in the immediate present in the
interest of nation-building, hoping that they, their children or
their childrens' children may gain enough consumers' satisfactions
in the future to compensate for the sacrifices of the present. This
would bring them very close to those who think primarily in terms
of nation-building, if it did not identify them absloutely. They
might, even though they themselves were younger sons, favor
primogeniture if they were convinced that it promoted the pros-
perity, power, and expansion of the nation, hoping that their
children and their childrens' children would gain enough through
citizenship in such a country to compensate for the loss to them-
selves.
This, however, is not intended as a defense of primogeniture.
I use this illustration partly because it was dignified by the great
Adam Smith, and partly because it is, in itself, a good illustration
of the principle which I am trying to make clear. Another il-
lustration, less realistic and less disputable, may be manufactured
for the occasion. If, instead of the father's landed estate, we
were to consider the father's sword as the object which passes by
inheritance, the point may be made clear. If, with the inheritance
of the father's sword, there was also inherited the obligation to
use it for the defense or the building of the nation, it could scarcely