38
American Economic Association
purchased to secure the price offered? Is it an open price,
or restricted to a certain number of customers? Is it an
artificial or natural price?
A mistake is made in inferring that the observation of
an economic fact is an easy operation. Observation has
only recently been regarded as an indispensable tool of
the natural and physical sciences. But it will be said that
everyone in these days has a wealth of economic infor-
mation at his command, and that it is unnecessary to im-
pose upon the student any special task in observation. A
large number of the so-called facts lose their reality when
translated into the language of the economist. Past ex-
perience appears to count for very little, and the student
must begin to learn the art of observation with a new pair
of glasses to correct the strabismus with which he has
been previously afflicted.
Certain facts are like gold in placer deposits, readily
detected and worked out; others, however, are disguised
and hidden in a composition, and can be extracted only by
ingenious methods. As a large part of the gold product
of today is obtained by sulphide and cyanide processes
which involve an expert knowledge of chemical proper-
ties, so an increasing number of facts need to be assayed,
and can be analyzed only by a knowledge of the economic
material in which they lie imbedded. Nor would I imply
that all complex relationships can be disentangled, but
what we ought to insist upon is that the observations we
do rely upon shall be indisputable. To change the figure,
we erroneously take it for granted that our economic
facts are already sorted, neatly arranged in parcels, la-
beled and ready to be picked up as they are wanted. For
the great mass of mankind this convenient possession.
does not exist. Rather they are scattered about at ran-
dom, or heaped up in piles at every conceivable angle;
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:25:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
