American people in general have too high a degree of material
well-being to risk it in such a mad and unnecessary attempt.
Truly, the present war shows that people may still be induced to
fight for what they consider racial or national existence, or even
supremacy, but it is far from proving that they can be persuaded
or compelled to fight for the purpose of maintaining a mere definition
of property rights, and that too a definition that has already
been rejected by the people who would in fact have to do with the
fighting and later pay the bills for the struggle. The average
American shrinks too much from the very idea of blood, slaughter,
pain, and hardship, to enter upon any such a wild and senseless
scheme.

On the other side, much as the concentrated vested interests
believe they are wronged, they of all people shrink most from
personal encounter and hardship. They might be willing to encourage
fighting so long as they can control the government and
compel, or induce, other classes to do the actual fighting and pay
the bills for them, but the moment they see the control of government
passing by peaceful means from their hands the spirit of
fight and physical resistance fades away. The modern millionaire
and his satellites are plotting and scheming, not fighting, animals.
Still better, the more enlightened among our rich men have
already become convinced that the present situation is both undesirable
and untenable. All that they need is to be convinced
that any proposition promises real reform to cause them to throw
themselves heart and soul into it.

While the great mass of factory and other social legislation of
the past generation when rightly viewed is seen to be in strict
harmony with the thesis herein maintained, unfortunately it has
been heretofore generally regarded as a strict exception to a
general rule or theory. In fact, it is an essential part of the
modern theory of property and economics. It is based on the
fundamental idea that the community, if it is to adjust itself to
everchanging social circumstances, must have a distinct social aim
to be accomplished through the agency of the state.
Under this doctrine economics will no longer be the science of
private pecuniary gain resting upon a system of abstract assumptions,
but the science of men in an organized society, working
within a state with a conscious social purpose. Such a state will
be effective only as it is easily amenable to a wisely directed public