unrest. The keeping open of the gates of immigration, together
with the constant increase of automatic, or semi-automatic, ma-
chinery made the profitable employment of a lower and lower
grade of workmen in our manufacturing industries possible. The
incoming of these hordes of various races, tongues, and religions,
prevented that effectual combination of labor which might have
done something in the absence of a strong government to check
the growing inequality of wealth and opportunity.
The interpretation of our constitution by which a corporate
charter became a contract and a corporation was endowed with
all the more important economic characteristics and rights of a
natural person, destroyed competition as a controlling factor in
industrial life. Lax corporation laws supplemented by liberal in-
terpretation of the same by the courts, led the corporations to
combine under various forms and to enter into gigantic trusts and
combinations.
When the American Economic Association was formed about a
quarter of a century ago, the prevailing system of economics
taught that the state or organized society as such had nothing to
do with economics, although it must be said to the credit of some
of the founders that they protested vigorously against such doc-
trines. Economics was considered, in the English speaking world,
a purely abstract philosophy-an a priori science. The sole
function of the state was to preserve law and order, and to prevent
physical violence to persons and injury to property. Under the
assumption of individual liberty, freedom of contract, free and
beneficent competition, whatever wrong existed would tend to right
itself. Hence, society, as such, need not concern itself consciously
about the conditions of production or distribution. Contrary to
the theory, this beautiful system of abstract philosophy never had
any very close relation to the actual world of affairs at any time,
or in any place. But the increasing inequality of wealth and
opportunity drove the the actual world every day farther and far-
ther away from the prevailing theory of economics. Competition
never applied as completely in any nation or community as the early
economists implied, for the simple reason that to be effective compe-
tition must be between units of substantially equal bargaining
power. This means not only the equal personal liberty of the con-
tracting parties, on which we have laid so much stress, but it also
calls for substantially equal intelligence, knowledge, and economic
well-being. In other words, each party must be free to enter into a