The question posed by Malthus refuses to be ignored. Again
and again the nations are forced to give ear to it. The celebrated
essay in 1798 marked the boundary between two eras of
thought on this question. Before that a large and increasing
population was generally favored; since that date it has never
ceased to be looked upon by some with doubt and with fear.
The contrast between the two eras, however, is less in respect
to the judgment of results than in respect to the criterion by
which those results are to be measured. Before Malthus the
criterion was the prosperity of the sovereign and of the ruling
classes; thereafter it became the welfare of the increasing masses.
Unwittingly, but none the less truly, Malthus set before the eyes
of men a new picture of the humble unit of population. Instead
of the man with the hoe, patient taxpayer and soldier of the king,
frugal workman contributing with his teeming fellows to swell
the rents of landlords and the profits of employers, Malthus
helped the world to see the human individual, striving to maintain
a family and to win the joys of life, but finding the very number
of his fellows an obstacle in the way toward these ends. Before
Malthus population was a question either of political or of commercial
economy; with him it began to be a question of social
economy.

These statements appear paradoxical when one recalls that the
first purpose of Malthus was to dispel the illusory hopes of social
perfection. His proposition that population has a fateful tendency
to outstrip the production of food was used to condone the
patent evils of existing society. His doctrine became the stock
argument to discourage plans of social betterment.
This may

all be granted. Our purpose is not to praise Malthus but to appreciate
him. In the perspective of more than a century neither
the conscious purposes of men nor the immediate applications of
their teachings are usually seen to have determined their real
influence. Malthus had in some ways a. narrow outlook, and
his often confused thought gave false implications to the main