Economics and The Law
11
these rights too closely bound up in the minds of their owners with
the political control that affects all vested rights?
In the light of history, it will, perhaps, be admitted by all that
no large body of property, whether it be the public office or slaves.
of bygone days, or the saloons of today, can exist indefinitely
against a growing sentiment that such property is injurious to
the welfare of society as a whole. It is probable that no consti-
tutional or legal forms can save such property. Furthermore, if
such property is maintained for generations by what the public
considers immoral means, and until the burden of compensation
would stagger the public, it is doubtful whether the public will
even offer compensation. This is more likely to be the case where
the property is of such a nature (as in the case of slavery) that
public sentiment will not allow the compensating body to recoup
the price paid by the further use of the thing as property.
If these premises be correct, does the question not come down
simply to this, whether when the issue is forced the owners will
consent to a gradual and peaceful modification of property rights
without compensation? If not, the alternative would seem to be
the final appeal to force. This brings us to the primitive doctrine
that one is entitled to such property only as he is physically able
to defend and hold. But such a condition carries us out of the
realm of law into that of mere might and reduces us to a state of
nature. No one who understood the situation would want to main-
tain a constitutional form that reduces us to this condition. This
means the abandonment of law and a shifting of the economic
equilibrium by force as in the Peasants' Rebellion of 1381. In the
case of the abolition of the monasteries under Henry the Eighth,
as also of the political reforms in England, 1832, the property
owners were better advised and consented, very unwillingly it is
true, to a shifting of the economic power to other classes by more
or less peaceful means. This of course involved a large modifica-
tion of property rights as well as of political rights, and, in fact,
a large confiscation of private property. The reforms offer a close
parallel to the prohibition movement of today with its direct
confiscations.
The control of government has always given content and mean-
ing to property rights for determining the distribution of wealth
among the different classes of society. In America today those
in control of our concentrated wealth find themselves apparently
entrenched behind an almost unamendable constitution, based upon
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:47:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
