ulation to one representative can be computed from the population
of each state and the size of the House.
The effect of this false start is felt in certain anomalies or para-
doxes to which the Vinton method gives rise.
A method theoretically sound should apply equally well to the
entire range of possibilities whether of interest to Congress or not.
The smallest possible House would consist of 49 members, 48 un-
apportionable and one apportionable, the last obviously going to
New York. But if the population of the country is divided by 49
and the population of each state divided by the quotient, as the
Vinton method prescribes, New York and Pennsylvania would
receive four members apiece, even if no fractions were recognized,
and only 41 members would remain to be apportioned among the
other 46 states. Near the lower limit of possibilities the Vinton
method yields results which are obviously absurd.
A method theoretically sound should never produce the Alabama
paradox; under the Vinton method this paradox frequently occurs.
In 1901 the majority of the House Committee on the Census recom-
mended that there should be no increase in the size of the House,
its number at the time being 357. But in the set of tables we pre-
pared under the Vinton method Colorado received two representa-
tives with a House of 357 or 358 members and three not merely
for every higher number but also for every lower number down to
350, where the series of tables began. It was more than difficult,
it was impossible, to persuade the House that these results were
equitable, and its dissatisfaction with them had no little influence
upon its decision to reject the report of the majority and accept
that of the minority, substituting another number and table from
which the Alabama paradox was absent.
A method theoretically sound must be reversible. Thus, if the
House is to contain 435 members, that result might be approached
either by adding representatives seriatim from the minimum of
48 or by withdrawing them from some number much above 435. A
method proposed by Seaton and endorsed by Walker in 1882 was
tested by Congress far enough to show that it uniformly favored
the populous states and was incontinently rejected on that ground.
But if the same method had been reversed and the result ap-
proached by successive subtractions rather than successive addi-
tions, the outcome would have been just as definitely favorable to
the small states.
A method theoretically sound should hold the balance true be-