If this conclusion is correct, but two methods of those which
have been tried remain to be examined, the method of major frac-
tions and the Vinton method. The arguments in favor of the
former and against the latter are of two classes: practical argu-
ments likely to gain the attention of members and committees of
Congress; and theoretical arguments appealing to statists and
mathematicians, but with little meaning for the general public.
During the prolonged controversy the solution reached by Con-
gress has at times appeared to theorists indefensible and the solu-
tions proposed by theorists have seemed to Congress unjust or in-
comprehensible. In this controversy I believe that Congress has
usually been right in its instinctive judgment, but unable or indis-
posed to furnish a convincing defense of its decision, and that the
theorists, while better equipped with arguments, have been defend-
ing an untenable position.
The fundamental difference between the Vinton method and the
method of major fractions, as already explained, is that the for-
mer starts from an assumed number of representatives and the
latter from an assumed ratio. So we are brought face to face with
the question, Which is the correct point of departure? Certain
practical considerations likely to affect the choice of Congress
between these methods will first be presented and later the more
theoretical arguments.
The method of an assumed ratio is implied in the Constitution,
which says, “The number of representatives shall not exceed one
for every thirty thousand." The purpose and result of this clause
were to limit the size of the House. If the Convention had had in
mind a method starting with a number of representatives, it would
have been more natural to make the clause read, "The number of
representatives shall not exceed x (e.g., 120 or 112)." The
phrasing of this limitation indicates that in thinking of appor-
tionment the members of the Constitutional Convention of 1787
instinctively began with a round number of persons to each rep-
resentative. Yet the form of the limitation was doubtless influ-
enced also by a desire to open the way for an increase in the size
of the House as the population of the country grew.
Until long after the fathers of the Constitution had passed off
the stage, this method was followed without hesitation or challenge.
When the change to the Vinton method, or method of a computed
ratio, was made, it was not from dissatisfaction with the method
of an assumed ratio in the form it took after 1840. The main