gree of density had been attained which made possible the highest
level of the general welfare. The theory of evolution as applied to
social progress has suggested that a certain pressure of conflict-
ing and thwarted desires is required to keep a people industrious,
inventive, and progressive. The crude version of the theory im-
plies the necessity of competition on the plane of physical want
resulting from the pressure of population. A subtler conception
would place this competition on the higher plane of developing
desires made possible by industrial advance, political democracy,
popular education, and a widening horizon of thought. A large
part of our people have attained that stage now, and the cultural
circle is ever widening. The spur of progress consists of the felt
limitations of incomes, relative to expanding desires, rather than
in the pangs of hunger. Once the spur of progress was objective,
now it is subjective.
Popular aspirations and ideals.
In the last century popular education and ideals were rising at
the same time that a rising scale of wages was made possible by
industrial improvements accompanying the development of great
material resources. Yet this fortunate union of events did not suf-
fice to prevent the growth of discontent. Popular aspirations out-
stripped material progress. Much more ominous is the situation
now that the pressure of population in America is beginning to
check and reverse this trend of the popular welfare. Those who
profit for a time by these shifts in the forces of distribution may
find, like those who benefited by slavery, that they have bartered
the peace and security of their children for the pleasures of a
brief season.
The common man in our democracy has at stake the preserva-
tion of the advantages of our broad territory and bountiful re-
sources. The only factor in the present increase of population
that is controllable in large measure by legislative action is immi-
gration. Many representatives of organized labor, though moved
by more immediate considerations than those here presented, favor
limitation. But the mass of the workers, diverted by false coun-
cils, traditional sentiments, and racial sympathies, are divided on
the question. Without help from other groups of citizens the
laborers of America can not obtain the needed legislation.
Whether that help will be progressively granted in the years to
come depends on the clearness of our economic judgments and on