8
American Economic Association
wealth, by discovering, developing, and training the productive
ability of its population.
The American people have been much concerned of late about
the conservation of their natural resources, and they may well be
thus exercised. Waste represents an absolute loss in the human
economy. There is no doubt that we have permitted the national
wealth of the country to be exploited in an uneconomical way
in many directions, owing to the greed, or shortsightedness, or
both, of private interests. This exploitation has steadily been
accompanied at many points by waste. Waste is, economically
speaking, a sin for which there is no pardon. Its penalty must be
borne either by the people who are guilty of it, or by those who
succeed them, and the American people has undoubtedly been
wasteful in the exploitation of its natural resources. We have
mined our coal oftentimes in such a way as to destroy forever the
value of a large part of it. We have allowed our natural gas in
great quantities to escape into the atmosphere or be burned as it
came from the bowels of the earth, with no resulting economic
gain. We have undoubtedly used at many points wasteful methods
in the cutting off of our forests, and have failed to observe that
the larger interest of the community as a whole demanded a
greater care in the removal of our timber wealth.
But after all, the mere preservation of natural resources is not
in any proper sense of that term a conservation of natural re-
sources, that is, such a care of the natural resources as will work
out the largest economic result. The American Indian had pre-
served the natural resources of the North American continent
up to the coming of Christopher Columbus, and for anything that
we can see would have preserved them for countless generations.
The Mexican peon still preserves the natural resources of great
stretches of the most fertile Mexican territory. The savages of
Africa, and generally speaking of all countries, preserve the
natural resources; but we can hardly speak of them as conserving
them in any proper sense.
There will naturally be great differences of opinion as to whether
any particular policy in exploiting the forests or the mines or the
fields is, economically speaking, wasteful or not. That which
seems to be wasteful at one time and under one set of conditions
may be the height of economy under other conditions. The lavish
use of natural resources may in some places be the condition of
developing a civilization which may subsequently find it necessary
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
