16
American Economic Association
enterprise failed or could not be depended on to render the service
to the country which the country needed and demanded.
Even before the war there were many examples of some sort of
government participation. Railways were often built in part by
subsidy of nation, state, or locality, in order that the public in-
terest might be served. Irrigating, forestry, and water power de-
velopment have had government ownership or participation in
various forms. Abroad, both town and nation are sometimes co-
owners with individuals in the forests.
I may add that, in my opinion, the rather common idea that
profits should be limited to a "fair rate of interest" is not a solu-
tion of the difficulty. It is as absurd and unfair as the socialists'
dictum that profits are essentially stolen from workmen's wages.
Nothing would serve so effectually to kill enterprise as to forbid
the enterpriser from securing more profits than he could get by
lending his money, unless at the same time we protect him against
losses. Some one must assume the risks of enterprise, and he
who assumes the risks of loss is entitled to the chance of profits.
As long as we keep the system by which the private capitalist is,
single handed, to struggle to win wealth from natural resources,
we must give him the chance of winning big prizes together with
the chance of great losses.
Needless to say, therefore, I am not attacking the man who
takes profits under the present system. He ought not, or not
always, to be stigmatized as a profiteer. Nor am I attacking the
man who wills his property in the ordinary way. Both are play-
ing the game according to the present rules. My criticism is not
of the players, but of the rules. New rules may be found-rules
better for both the players and the onlookers.
Our society will always remain an unstable and explosive com-
pound as long as political power is vested in the masses and eco-
nomic power in the classes. In the end one of these powers will
rule. Either the plutocracy will buy up the democracy or the
democracy will vote away the plutocracy. In the meantime the
corrupt politician will thrive as a concealed broker between the
two.
On the face of it, we should expect that all the evils mentioned
would be relieved if we had more democracy in industry, that is,
if the workman and the public felt that the great industries were
partly theirs, both as to ownership and as to management.
As to the representation of workmen in the management, some
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:50:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
