Government Control of Economic Life
11
There is no more economic reason for fixing prices to enable labor
to get a fair wage or the consumer to get a “fair price” than
there is to fix prices in order to enable the investor to get a
"fair interest." There may be reasons for doing both, if it
were practicable. But the practicability is doubtful because of
the complexity and changeableness of the factors involved. The
government and its agents have no means of determining before-
hand the effects of any particular line of action on prices. They
could not fix prices fair to investors, workers, and consumers
without knowing costs and conditions of markets and a multi-
tude of other things which are changing from day to day, and
which, if they could be discovered and set down in figures, would
be beyond the understanding of anybody but the expert in busi-
Nor could they allow for foreign competition. The at-
tempt would very likely check accumulation and investment. We
have a good illustration of the possible effects of such an at-
tempt in the railroad situation in the United States at present.
ness.
If the application of the minimum wage doctrine and price
regulation in any large way should curtail industry and increase
unemployment, the government would be called on to provide for
an increasing number of people out of work. The number thus
to be taken care of would doubtless grow in time, not only from
industrial causes, but from the stimulation to population which
would come from a lowering of the moral fiber of the people. For
the easier it is made for one part of society to get a living at
the expense of another part of society, the larger will be the de-
mand for it and the lower the moral tone of those who demand
it. A recent illustration of this fact is found in the effects of
Germany's thirty years' experience with insurance against sick-
ness and accidents. Cheating, malingering, and even a certain
physical degeneration, have become widespread, so that many
thoughtful people are alarmed at the weakening of the moral
fiber of the nation, and the sapping of its physical vigor.
From the point of view of economic theory, the proposals, es-
pecially with reference to the minimum wage, involve a new ethics
and a new economic law of distribution. Broadly speaking, every
theory of wages is, first, an explanation of existing conditions,
and, second, an attempted justification of them. Each theory.
has been accepted so long as its practical result was consonant
with the prevailing ideal of the general welfare, which means
acceptable to the multitude or group or class in power.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:46:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
