6
American Economic Association
ernment. But now we see, not that the hypothesis was false, but
that it was provisional. The most autocratic government remain-
ing over from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries of Europe
is the most efficient.
The old theory started, too, with the assumption that power
and liberty are two mutually exclusive and hostile principles in
the life of a nation. Power is the power of despotic government,
the force that gives sanction to the personal decrees of a sov-
ereign-in short, power is arbitrary coercion. But liberty is
freedom from coercion. It is escape from the power of the state
and refuge in the benevolence of nature. So, liberty is conformity
to the laws of nature; power is violation of nature's law.
But the new theory of Germany starts with the hypothesis that
the power of the state is not a violation, but the ripe fruit and
the evolutionary outcome of the laws of nature. Power is the
rule, not of reason, but of will; and nature is not reason, as it
was to the philosophers of the eighteenth century, but, to the
philosophers of the twentieth century, nature is will, and the high-
est will on earth is the will of the state. There are, therefore, no
natural rights of individuals superior to the will of the state, and
consequently no corresponding duties of individuals, no morals,
no ethics, no sanctity of private contracts nor of international
treaties nothing, indeed, that looks for its validity towards any
so-called law of nature, if that conflicts with the highest law of
nature, which resides in the will of the state.
But this culmination of the will of nature in the will of the
state, with its absorption of private will into political will, re-
quires something to take the place of liberty. Although liberty
finds no support in a fictitious natural law or natural rights, yet
still the greatest thing that contributes to the power of the state
is this very private initiative, private inventiveness, the energy
of the individual. Sweep away his natural rights by substituting
the will of the state for the reason of nature, and there must be
substituted, not indeed that arbitrary coercion which provoked
laissez faire, but such a scientific use of the power of the state,
based on accurate knowledge of human nature, as will lead the
individual to exert himself to the utmost. Abolish liberty, but
substitute inducement. Offer rewards, promotions, distinctions,
honors, bonuses, subsidies, establish technical schools and an edu-
cational system that will oversupply the market for brains.
Obtain the maximum output of human energy for the sake of the
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:49:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
