00
8
American Economic Association
them, has always had, and must always have, as its ultimate aim,
among these peoples, the establishment of welfare. All social in-
stitutions, including the system of private property, are en-
couraged, or permitted, for this end. As Justice Bruce of the
Supreme Court of North Dakota has put the matter: "It can
now be safely said that the courts and the public generally have
come to see and to hold that a right to property and liberty
should never be guaranteed in matters and things which are in-
jurious to the public health, the public welfare, or the public
morality, or even to the convenience of the public as a whole."
As we have seen, the call for the application of the power of
government assumes several forms. Some call upon it to restore
the competitive principle by breaking up large industries, and so
to regulate business that competition will operate within certain
assigned limits. This is the neomercantilism that is sweeping
over the world. Some call upon it to assume that competition as
a regulative force is dead, and therefore to permit monopoly
under supervision. Others insist that since competition is dead
and monopoly established the government itself shall take over
and manage the greatest of these monopolies. This is the demand
of the socialists.
It is not worth our while to consider the last proposal. There
is no evidence worth considering that the American people have
yet reached the point where they desire the establishment of the
socialistic state. The principles of individual liberty and the
rights that have been established upon them through the long
struggle of four centuries will not be abandoned. Economic
liberalism in the large sense is and will remain a living faith
among the English-speaking peoples, even though they may see
fit to establish what is called the new "social state."
It is impossible, of course, to discuss now all the projects put
up, either for the complete restoration of competition, or for its
partial restoration under government regulation. I invite your
attention, therefore, to a few of the proposed lines of action.
It is urged, first, that the government promote welfare by general
social legislation; second, that the government regulate wages,
particularly by establishing a general minimum wage; third, that
the government regulate prices, particularly in those articles
that may be regarded as the products of monopolistic, or partly
monopolistic, industries; fourth, that the government determine
in some way the form and size of business organizations; fifth,
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:46:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
