ANNUAL PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
293
must meet and also give the clue as to the line of real prog-
ress. An economist cannot hope to succeed either in gaining
personal renown or in influencing the public by book-making or
essay writing; the only part of his work that lives on is his
charts, diagrams and contrasts. To say this is probably to shock
and possibly to give offense. Most of us have an ambition to
write some day a ponderous volume, and if we lack confidence
in our ability to do this we at least hope some of our contempor-
aries will do it for us. "Oh for an Adam Smith or a John Stuart
Mill to do for our age what they did for their own." We all feel
this and long for its realization, and yet those who try fail, not
from lack of ability, but because they are trying an impossible
task and are moved by a false ideal. The first volume of such a
treatise has occasionally been written but the repeated post-
ponement of the completing parts reveal obstacles that even the
ableșt men are unable to surmount. The trouble is that the
author exhausts his contrasts, diagrams and charts in his first
volume and has nothing left for subsequent volumes except hazy
generalizations, dull descriptions and utopian dreams. In con-
trast to this ideal of bulky volumes and complete discussion I hold
that the better the economist the clearer, shorter and more precise
are his utterances. The essence of economic literature lies in its
contrasts. A book is merely the trail along which its author
has gone in his search for clear expression and sharp analysis.
This is of great importance to the author but of little con-
sequence to the reader. In no place can this be more clearly
seen than in the Wealth of Nations. Who would go to Adam
Smith for his material? And yet there are hundreds of pages of
it badly arranged and poorly presented. The book would have
gone to the trash pile as soon as printed if this were all there was
in it. The real gems in the book are its fresh contrasts. The
very possibility of a scientific political economy depended on the
contrast of sympathy with self-interest and the form that the
economics of the next century was to take was fixed by the con-
trast of land, labor and capital in production and of rent, interest
and wages in distribution. From these contrasts no one has
broken but they all might have been stated on a single page or
put in telling diagram. The five hundred pages of reading matter
which it took Smith ten years to collect and to write is of value
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:19:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
