The problem of getting new capital for economic reconstruction
after the war is the serious problem thrown upon us by the war.
Already the warring nations have begun to stagger under the
load of debt for military purposes. The burden of debt means
heavy taxes. New sources of revenue must be found. These
taxes may be levied in such a way as to burden industry and
handicap private enterprise, or in such a way as to place the
burden on various kinds of excess profits, unearned increments,
and special benefits. The latter tends to reduce the taxes on new
capital, going as far in some cases as to exempt it altogether
from taxation, and so to unburden industry and invigorate private
enterprise. This is the lesson taught by the American system
of special assessments on account of special benefits. Capital is
raised for public improvements, not by burdening the investor, but
by taxing an unearned increment.

But it is not only new sources for obtaining capital that the
war has forced us to seek; it is also a new way of telling where
it shall be invested when found. Here the war has also forced
the method upon our attention. It notifies us that the doctrine
of laissez faire is dead. The nation that killed it now threatens
to build world empire on the others that did not know it was dead.
In whatever direction we look, even in our own country, we see
interested parties arranging its funeral. And it is dead just because
it cannot secure new capital to be invested where either
the nation or those directly interested want the investment to be
made. If it is the foreign export of products that we want, then
the nation must provide a merchant marine by means of taxes
or subsidies. If it is the open door for foreign investment and
export of capital to backward countries that we want, then the
nation must tax or bond itself for armies and navies to protect
those investments. And if it is the development of our own resources
that we want, by means of highways, railways, rural credit,
reclamation, or industrial education, then the nation again must
tax itself or bond itself or guarantee private bonds in order to
subsidize the needed improvement.

Laissez faire is dead, and the only question is, where shall the
state employ its taxing power and its borrowing power in order
both to get and to invest the new capital?
If the foregoing analysis of American theories of value, of
property, and of sovereignty, has significance, it lies in this: that
American democracy and its Supreme Court have already given