men, one of the most notable is the keener desire which we all now
feel to be of genuine public service. During the war hundreds of
our members have done "war work." In Washington alone one
hundred and twenty of them have been in public service.
During the impending world-reconstruction, economists will
probably have more opportunity to satisfy this impulse than
most students in other departments of human thought; for the
great problems of reconstruction are largely economic.
It therefore becomes each of us, as we pause on the threshold
of a possible "new world," to consider what are the new opportunities
and what the new duties which lie before us.
That new

world of which we are all speaking is still unbuilt. Is it to build
itself, unplanned, or is it to have architects? And are we to be
numbered among the architects? These are undoubtedly some of
the thoughts and hopes and fears which stir us today.
How different they are from those of our own economic teachers
a generation ago! Then many economists thought it beneath their
dignity to engage at all in practical affairs except to cry: “Laissez
faire." They believed that a scientist should be simply an observer,
compiler, and interpreter of facts, not a guide, counsellor,
and friend of humanity.

It is noteworthy that their attitude of academic aloofness not
only failed to give to economic study, in the eyes of the world, that
status of a "true science” which they claimed for it but, on the
contrary, brought it into disrepute and provoked a vigorous reaction.
The world demanded that economics should become something
more than "the dismal science."

Accordingly, a new economics sprang up, intent on "doing
something." This new school was centered in Germany as the
older "Manchester School" was centered in England.
When the American Economic Association was founded thirtythree
years ago the antagonism between these two schools was at
its height. In fact, we owe the formation of this Association
chiefly to that antagonism. A number of young American economists,