6
American Economic Association
talent which forms such an important element in the system of
national production, and which distinguishes nations and races in
quite as marked a way as the quality of the laborer himself.
I am aware that some authorities are inclined to deny that a
nation may by conscious effort increase the number or the potency
of these fundamental elements of national production. They are
inclined to think that just as the coal, and natural gas, and gold
and silver, and the possibly arable land are things given once for
all, so national talent and national ability are, so to speak, fixed
quantities. A nation cannot materially increase either their
amount or their potency by any conscious effort looking toward
their promotion.
Thus the great Bavarian economist and statistician, Wilhelm
V. Hermann, one of the shrewdest of the German writers on
economics, is very outspoken in his view that no nation can
through its school system or its educational system really increase
greatly the efficiency of its national industry. He says, "wie er
geboren, so ist der Mench sein leben lang:" "As the child is
born so the man remains as long as he lives:" though even he
would allow, I presume, that if we could have caught his grand-
father and trained him and also his father we might have improved
the grandson.
But, I believe that this is a mistaken view. I share the uncon-
scious feeling which seems to animate the American people to an
ever increasing extent that, by systematic effort, the latent
national ability may be called forth and may be trained to such
an extent as to make the result of such an educational system
essentially different in quality and in kind, and not merely in
quantity, from that which would be the outcome of letting things
take care of themselves.
It seems quite probable that a people like that of the United
States may, by systematic and persistent effort, develop to abso-
lutely unheard of and undreamed of proportions, the ability of
the nation in all the different directions in which human faculties
may be exerted.
Every student of human civilization must be struck by two
things: first, the large number of different elements which must
conspire together at any one time in order to produce a great
increase in national wealth; and, on the other hand, how few
people after all in the history of the race have really contributed
in any important way to working out the problems upon whose
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
