Significance of a Comprehensive System of Education
ry
solution the next great advance in civilization depended. No such
production of national wealth as has occurred within the last
generation could have taken place, of course, without the co-
operation of countless influences reaching back in their develop-
ment and origin into the remotest periods of the past. But very
small is the number of men after all who have really contributed
by their scientific discovery, or their inventive genius, in any
important way to this progress. If we could multiply that small
number by two, or three, or four, or five, or ten, or a hundred-
as might easily be done if we were to adopt a system of education
which will discover, call forth, and train all the talent of the
community to its highest efficiency-the progress of civilization
would be correspondingly hastened. The human race has spent
such a large part of its total wealth in war that we have little
idea as to the enormous progress that might be achieved if the
energy and attention of the race could be turned as fully and com-
pletely toward this problem of developing the race on the side
of its industrial talents as it has been turned to the work of
destruction.
This progress does not always seem rapid. The race, of course,
must have time to develop, must have time to grow, in order to
be capable of the intellectual effort, nay even of the prolonged
physical effort, involved in the production of such enormous
quantities of material wealth as have been produced within the
last century. It is inconceivable that the African or the American
Indian, as Columbus knew him, or generally speaking any bar-
barous peoples, should develop within a generation or even two
generations those particular qualities to that particular extent
which are necessary to develop and maintain a high degree of
civilization. The mere qualities of endurance, or persistence, of
imagination, necessary to enable the civilized man to continue
at even the rudest of civilized occupations long enough to work
out their natural results are lacking to the barbarian.
But,
Now, of course, it is undoubtedly true that the possibilities of
any system of education are strictly limited by these fundamental
facts founded in the nature of individuals and of races.
given the civilized white or yellow man as we know him today,
as the result of countless generations of ever expanding civiliza-
tions, my proposition is that such a nation can, by a conscious
effort, increase to a very great extent the production of national
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:27:21 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
