For some twenty-five years there has been a marked recession
among English-speaking peoples from the strong individualism of
the early 19th century towards a gradual extension of government
authority in economic matters. Laissez-faire has been discredited
both as a principle of political philosophy and as a rule of con-
duct. Whether we should try to restore its prestige or with what
other principle we shall replace it, however, are matters concern-
ing which current discussion is somewhat confused. On the one
hand are those who declare that competition has broken down, and
has produced a monopolistic system which will in time completely
supplant it, and which is of such tremendous extent and power
that it can be managed only by the government. On the other
hand are those who believe that competition is a force which should
be preserved as a ruling power in economic life, and would there-
fore prevent by government action the establishment of monopolies
and break them up where they are already established. This, in
substance, is the policy that our own federal government has been
pursuing since the enactment of the Interstate Commerce Law in
1887. Still others urge that all we need to do is to prevent the
evils of excessive competition by setting limits within which com-
petitive forces must work. The first group of thinkers take the
socialistic view and call for government ownership or at least for
direct government management. The second group are still in
effect believers in the laissez-faire principle, and think to restore
it by destroying monopoly. The third group also are still faith-
ful to their belief in the efficacy of competition but would restrict
its field of operation at the bottom so as to prevent industrial
degradation.
A centralizing tendency, that is, a departure from the principle
of individual liberty and a return to the principle of authority, is
to be seen in many if not all domains of thought at the present
time. Therefore, to understand properly what is going on in
industrial life we need to look at the change that is going on in
other life spheres. The terms laissez-faire and competition are