ing with mere observation as applied by the geologist, or the
astronomer, or the zoologist. Most economic experiments, though
they may not be made with an avowed scientific purpose, are yet
made on the basis of a definite theory, and the fact that this theory
often enjoys the complete confidence of the legislator does not
alter the fact that it is in its essence experimental, inasmuch as
its results are problematical.
Francis Place, for example, thought that the excesses of trade
unions were due to the restrictions of the law and that, if these
were removed, industrial peace would prevail. His agitation
brought about the repeal of the English combination laws in 1824,
but the great increase in strikes and other disturbances which
promptly followed completely disproved his theory.
Not only do economic experiments rest as a rule upon some
hypothesis, but they often rest upon the theories of the economists
themselves, which, though they are often derided in the beginning,
slowly filter from the text-books through the magazines and news-
papers into the popular mind and influence public opinion, at
times, long after the economists themselves have ceased to believe
them. The economist has at least one attribute of divinity in that
his mills, like those of the gods, grind slowly.
John Stuart Mill advocated taxing the unearned increment in
the value of land as far back as 1848.5 But when the British
Parliament took the matter up sixty years later, the proposition
impinged upon the Tory mind with the painful shock of a new
idea.
In order to confirm the general view of the relations of the
economist to history which has just been expressed, let us look
specifically at the history of the United States.
The very conditions under which the North American conti-
nent was settled emphasized economic interests above all others.
Such interests are potent in the history of all nations, but, if we
compare our country with Europe since the Middle Ages, we must
recognize that there are two forces very prominent in deter-
mining the history of Europe, which were absent from our coun-
try. One is dynamic ambition, which could not exist in a country
without kings or princes. The other is religious zeal. It is true
that the desire to worship God in their own way led the Pilgrims
first to settle in New England, but it is fair to say that we have

**5 First edition of Political Economy, 1848, p. 361.**