The doctrine of laissez faire had a practical and a theoretical
origin. On the practical side was the inefficiency and the autocracy
of government. On the theoretical side, the doctrine of the
Law of Nature and the natural rights of the individual.
It needed no proof in the eighteenth century that government
was incompetent and despotic. The fact stood out in every attempt
of the middle classes to take advantage of the discovery
of America, of the new expansion of markets, and the new inventions
of machinery.

Great Britain, by the accident of her island more than the
theory of her philosophers, proved that, in order to conquer and
settle the New World, to expand her markets, to invent and use
machinery, government does most when it does least. The westward
ho! of Britain's free-booters and discoverers, the eastern
and westward conquests of the Plymouth, the London, the East
India, and other companies of "adventurers”-in short, the private
initiative and private capital of her ungoverned subjects—
gave to England a navy and an empire. Then, when her inventors
and manufacturers escaped from the governmental regulation of
the town gilds to the unregulated open country of Manchester
and Birmingham, it was private initiative and private capital that
gave to England her wealth and a world market.
Finally Adam Smith, borrowing from France the philosophy
of a benevolent law of nature, the rule of Universal Reason, justified
in theory what England had already demonstrated in practice.
And so England, by her happy experiment, got the start of
the rest of Europe by one or two hundred years, but tied herself
to a theory of laissez faire which assumed that the conditions
would always hold the same. The experiment and its theory have
brought her, indeed, the wealth of nations, but the theory put her
asleep while another experiment and another theory were shaping
themselves to snatch her wealth and perpetuate her sleep.
The theory of the beneficent Law of Nature started from the
hypothesis of both the incompetency and the autocracy of government.