become so large as to diminish somewhat the amount of money
wastefully spent upon so-called internal improvements, or if it
would diminish or at least call a halt to the increasing expenditures
for the army and the navy, this to my mind would be an additional
reason for the adoption of such a plan.

You will remember that we had twenty-five years ago a similar
proposition before the federal government, known as the Blair bill,
under which it was proposed to distribute fifty millions of dollars
to the states in aid of elementary and secondary education. I
a warm advocate of that proposition at that time and I
had a good illustration not long ago of how the deeds of men live
after them, when in an eastern paper some reference was made to
me as that crank who had urged the adoption of the Blair bill.¹
was

I remember a conference which I had during that time with
Mr. Godkin, the editor of the New York Nation, one of the most
trenchant political writers of the time, and one who was opposed
to the appropriation contemplated by the Blair bill. He objected
that the national expenditure had already run to such limits as
to threaten national bankruptcy, and that the nation could not
undertake such additional expenditure of this sort without seriously
impairing national credit. I urged upon his attention an
entirely different veiw, namely, that we might determine, to some
extent, if we took hold of the matter in earnest, the distribution
of national expenditure. We might determine that some of it
should be spent for education instead of having it all spent for
war; but that the circumstances of the time indicated as clearly
as anything could that expenditure was bound to increase, and
no amount of effort was going to prevent a large and continuous
increase. We might, by taking thought, get those larger expenditures
made on behalf of important things, but if we did
not do that the expenditures would go for impossible harbors,
¹Still earlier a proposition was made by James G. Blaine to appropriate
the income of the internal revenue tax on intoxicating liquors, estimated at
$60,000 per year, to this same purpose. I argued in favor of this policy in
the columns of the Illinois State Journal published at Normal, Illinois, in the
October and November issues of 1882 and January and February 1883.
The Chicago Tribune in December, 1882, strongly endorsed editorially the
position of the Illinois State Journal. And the Illinois Teachers' Association
on December 29, 1882, passed resolutions favoring the project. Later, on
December 29, 1883, the Philadelphia Press gave space in its columns for a
detailed argument in behalf of this measure. But in this case as in that of
the Blair Bill itself nothing was finally accomplished in the direction of
securing the passage of snch appropriation at that time.