As Bacon centuries ago taught men that "knowledge is to be
found by careful investigation of nature, not by spinning cobwebs,"
and "turned men from disputations of words to an observation
of the world around," so we are learning today for the first time
that economics is a science that has to do with the affairs of this
world and is not merely a part of abstract philosophy. Half a
century ago Mill was called severely to account for asserting that
while production rested on physical laws distribution rested on
the conventions of society. We are just beginning to find out how
wide of the mark the first part of this statement is, however true
within wide limits the latter may be.

Until within a decade or two economics was considered the science
of private pecuniary gain. Within very recent days the emphasis
has shifted from private gain to human welfare.
The traditional economics took definite shape at the moment
when the world was passing from one economic system, method
of production, and business organization to another. Its principles
were drawn almost entirely from the conditions then rapidly
passing away. They were posited on the condition of the independent
employer, who was at the same time skilled workman,
capitalist or owner of the instruments of production, and actual
director of industry. This was before the productive power of
the world was capable of producing a large surplus wealth. The
key to the industrial situation then was the trained independent
employer, working within the guild for his own account under the
rules formulated by the guild. The chief object of these rules
was to give every man an equal chance and to assure to him the
rewards of his industry and skill. Capital, in that age, though
important was not a separate category. The philosophy did not
provide for a condition of affairs in which the mass of the workmen
were unskilled, working for wages, and the instruments of
industry were owned by another class of society, for the most part
devoid of technical knowledge. The main object of guild rules
was always general well-being and not capitalistic profits.