decreasing size is a simple problem of elementary mathematics.*
Then, by assuming as a ratio for division any number between two
consecutive boundary ratios, an apportionment table may be
constructed which will distribute one more representative than a
table constructed by the use of any ratio lying between the next
larger pair of boundary ratios. The tables which result lack no
characteristic mentioned as desirable and have no characteristic
mentioned as undesirable in the congressional debates of the last
eighty years. They were accepted in 1911 without any opposition
in committee, House, or Senate.
Here the case might be rested and a verdict awaited. But before
the bar of theory, or in the judgment of an Association like ours,
the verdict of Congress will not be conclusive. I turn, therefore,
to an examination of the theoretical advantages and disadvan
tages of the two competing methods.
The Vinton method starts with an assumed number of represen-
tatives and divides the constitutional population of the United
States by that number to determine the ratio. This step involves
a fundamental theoretical error. It overlooks the crucial fact that.
seats in the House of Representatives are of two classes, the 48,
one for each state, which are guaranteed by the Constitution and
are as completely beyond the control of Congress as the seats of
the Senators are, and the remainder, the number and distribution
of which are under congressional control. The two classes might
be named the apportionable and the unapportionable seats. The
fact that they are not individually distinguishable has apparently
been responsible for the failure to recognize their existence.
To get this theoretical requirement clearly in mind it may be
helpful to think of the seats in the House of Representatives as
numbered. The first 48 seats, one for each state, would be num-
bered one to indicate that there is no basis for distinguishing be-
tween them. The next seat, numbered 49, would be apportioned
to New York, number 50 to Pennsylvania, and so on.
If the first representative falling to Pennsylvania or New York is
as irrelevant or disturbing a factor for determining the ratio as
the single representative falling to Nevada or Wyoming, then
clearly the ratio cannot be found by dividing the constitutional
population of the United States by the number of representatives.
Nor have I been able to discover any other way by which the pop-