In a democracy the people express their opinion on economic
problems, but without much opportunity, in the first instance, to
make that opinion intelligent. Workmen now act on the ideas,
often fallacious even from the standpoint of labor alone, of labor
leaders woefully ignorant of the fundamental principles of economics.
It is for lack of economic enlightenment that they approve
of limitation of output, extravagant expenditure on public
works, slackness and inefficiency of workmen, exclusion or destruction
of "labor saving” machinery, sabotage, limitation of apprentices,
cessation of trade schools, etc. In so doing they are
laboring under a "make work" delusion. Likewise, they are apt
to cry out for more money in times of inflation, under a money
delusion. It is encouraging to note, however, that recently some
labor elements, especially the English, as indicated by their recent
manifesto on Reconstruction, have become emancipated from most
of these doctrines.

The second suggestion is that there should be created an endowment
for economic research, in the management of which labor,
capital, and economists would, all three, share and which would be
a sort of laboratory for the study of the great economic problems
before us. Today the physical sciences have their great laboratories,
as a matter of course. But the economist is expected to
secure his own facts and statistics and make his own calculations
at his own expense. Expensive research, far beyond the reach
of the professor's purse, is necessary if the economist is to be of
any important public service in studying wealth distribution, the
profit system, the problem of labor unrest, and the other many
pressing practical problems. Harvard University, through its
Committee on Economic Research, and other Research Bureaus,
are now making a beginning in this direction.
Such an endowment as has recently been suggested might be
under the auspices of this Association or otherwise guarded
against narrow or partisan control.

Certainly if we are to serve the great world democracy which
we hope to see arise from the ashes of this great world conflagration,
we must see the problem whole.

Our present opportunity is one which, if now missed, may never
come again. The war has kindly lifted us, for a time, out of the
old ruts. Consequently the world is far more open-minded, more
expectant, and more desirous of getting at the real truth of things
today than ever before. But as the years roll by ruts will be worn