Economic Reconstruction
ry
state, with the minimum expenditure from the resources of the
state. Govern the people, not by liberty, but by psychology; not
by reason, but by scientific management; not by laws of nature,
but by inducements to human nature.
So we today are seeing the clash for control of the world be-
tween these two great experiments and their two appropriate
theories. On the one side is laissez faire, keep hands off, the doc-
trine that weakens the power of the state to enhance the liberty
of the individual. On the other the doctrine of power that
strengthens the state through scientific and economical manage-
ment of individuals.
Whatever the outcome, today is a day of reconstruction-re-
construction of theory and reorganization of practice.
The underlying theory of all the political and social sciences
is the theory of value. I need not say that economic theory rests
upon the laissez-faire philosophy of Adam Smith and the eight-
eenth century. It rests upon the isolated and ungoverned indi-
vidual seeking the highest net income for himself. Sociologists,
in recent years, have done much towards devising a social theory
of value, and economists have profited thereby. But there is
needed also a political or juristic theory of value.
The latter has already been rising up out of our American
democracy and the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United
States. In the decisions establishing the power of the state to
make special assessments on account of the value of special bene-
fits; then in the so-called unit rule of taxation on the total value
of public utility property; then in the quite opposite valuation
of public utilities for purposes of rate regulation; in these and
other decisions peculiar to our American system the Supreme
Court of the United States goes back to a theory of value as a
contest of power between individuals and classes in the community.
A court of law, unlike the economist, begins its theory of value
from the standpoint of two opposing litigants, representing two
opposing classes, with opposing rights and duties, instead of an
isolated individual exploiting nature which is the state without
rights or duties. Out of these contests of legislatures with courts,
and of litigants with litigants, over value as power has come, not
a laissez-faire theory of value resting on the psychology of business
in a state of nature, but a juristic or political theory of value,
resting on the struggles of American democracy for economic
power and liberty through politics. It is a theory whose starting
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:49:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
