to them, in the form of definite school instruction. This means,
of course, a radical and pronounced, and withal expensive, addition
to our educational system.

I would not have you understand that I believe that a systematic
school education is the only training of value for the youth of a
country in preparing them for their work as productive agencies.
Far be it from me to maintain any such proposition. I have seen
many cases of children who in my opinion would have learned
far more on the farm, in the shop, and in the office than they were
learning at school. On the other hand, there is not a single
occupation which requires skill, industry, and strength, in the
training for which the school, if properly conducted, cannot contribute
a more efficient element than any other agency at work
now in our society; and my proposition is that our educational
system be so organized that this element can be introduced into
our school system in the first place, and into our industrial system
in the second place.

What I have said thus far in regard to the elements which
enter into a comprehensive system of national education, applies
to all modern nations alike,- to England, France, and Germany,
to every civilized country of Europe or of Asia.
But this is especially true in the United States today. We are
trying to be a republic. We are trying to develop a democratic
state. We are far from having reached any such consummation,
but at any rate we are working toward it; and with every passing
decade I believe we are making some progress in spots; and if in
some places there seems to be deterioration or retrogression, owing
to peculiar circumstances, yet in others there are evident signs of
rapid evolution toward higher things.

Now no state can, politically speaking, be a true democracy,
unless it has also become a true democracy industrially speaking;
and one of the elements of a true democracy, industrially speaking,
is an opportunity for every child to develop the industrial capacities
within him to the very highest possible extent. This cannot
be done unless aside from his fundamental education involved in
the three R's, and the things which go with them, is also given a
chance for the acquirement of technical skill in connection with
intellectual development, so that a combination of industrial facility
with a developing brain and a developed body may be effected.
Such a system of education is especially necessary in the United