10
American Economic Association
the working people are much below those in America. Who would
suggest that with the conditions of popular thought in America
we could calmly contemplate the decline of wages and of the stand-
ard of living among us toward those of the German masses today?
The Swiss in their mountainous land with a population four
fifths as dense as that of Germany are achieving quite as wonderful
a result. Only a marvel of patient industry enables the Swiss to
draw their livelihood from such an area. Watch the Swiss peasant
at his work and you may understand. The cattle stand in the
stable while the peasant cuts their food and brings it to them lest
they may trample down the precious grass. Man's labor is less
valuable there than are the uses of that little patch of land. In
the haying season the harvester clings with one hand to the steep
mountain side, cutting the grass by the handful and piling it in
little bunches loaded down with stones to keep it from blowing
away, until it can be carried down into the valley on the backs
of men and women. That is what such a density of population
means, translated into terms of human labor.
Shall Italy be our population-ideal? A recent well-known trav-
eler¹ from America reports the ordinary food of the laborer in
Sicily as consisting of "a piece of black bread and perhaps a bit
of soup of green herbs of some kind or other." "For days or
months the peasants live on almost any sort of green thing they
find in the fields, frequently eating it raw just like the cattle."
Consequences of further rapid increase.
In the light of such facts, the flights of speculative statistics
regarding the possible increase of our population evidence a for-
getfulness of economic principles and a recklessness of economic
consequences. To force production very fast or far on a given
area entails some notable results. Cultivation must become in
part more intensive, with hand labor, in part more expensive, with
a larger investment in equipment on larger farms.
We have heard much of late the appeal, Back to the land! As
a plan to be followed by masses of men with the hope of relieving
the pressure of population it is vain. Every time one pair of
hands is added to the agricultural population, three more mouths
are added to the city population waiting to consume the products.
America has no exclusive knowledge of mechanical inventions
and no exclusive claim to their use. They are internationally
¹ Booker T. Washington, in The Man Farthest Down, 1912.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
