Vinton method, the other following the method of an assumed
ratio in its two forms, rejecting all fractions and rejecting only
minor fractions. In preparing the second set of tables the divisors
were successive multiples of 500. But a change of 500 in the
divisor did not regularly change the number of representatives by
one. Often no change, often a change of two, occasionally one
of three appeared, and in only one third of the cases did the re-
sults of successive tables differ by one representative. Of the two
numbers of representatives most considered by Congress, 357 and
386, the former being the existing number and the latter the small-
est number under which no state would lose a representative,
neither occurred in the second series of tables, following the
method of major fractions. Nevertheless, in its decision Congress
showed indirectly but convincingly its preference for that method,
by selecting the Vinton table for 384 members and adding two
representatives for major fractions which, in the table, received no
such consideration. Evidently Congress needed a series of tables
meeting two requirements, each table apportioning one more rep-
resentative than its predecessor and every major fraction en-
titling the state where it occurred to an additional representa-
tive; had sought to meet these conditions by translating the results
of the Vinton method into those of the method of major fractions;
and to do so had broken with the principle on which the Vinton
method rests.
To understand how the needs of Congress were met in 1910 we
may start with a divisor of six million, which is contained in New
York State's population of nine million 1.5 times. Under the
method of major fractions a divisor of six million would assign
New York two members and every other state one. Let the divisor
be reduced unit by unit and each of the series of quotients will
slowly increase; when the divisor falls to about five million, the quo-
tient for Pennsylvania rises above 1.5 and that state becomes en-
titled to a second representative. Let the divisor continue to fall;
at about three and three fourths million Illinois becomes entitled
to a second representative, and at three and two thirds million
New York becomes entitled to a third. By continuing this process
a House of any desired size may be apportioned under the method
of major fractions. To determine at what ratio the claim of
any state to any specified number of members matures and to
arrange the ratios for the several states, boundary ratios, as
I have ventured to call them, in one series following the order of