8
American Economic Association
points are the constitution, the bills of rights, the definitions of
private property, the sovereignty of the state, and which seeks
its standards of value through notions of equal opportunity,
equality of bargaining power, solidarity of interests, and public
utility.
Again, the American theory of laissez faire springs, not from
the autocracy of government, but from its inefficiency. There
was, in our early history, no effective a priori objection to the
state undertaking anything that the people wanted. But when
the experiments broke down through bankruptcy the same people
wrote laissez faire into the constitutions.
On the other hand, our theory of natural rights has not been
a theory of laissez faire. It appeared in our Declaration of In-
dependence, not in order to foreclose anything from governments
controlled by ourselves, but in order to justify our escape from
the autocratic government of England. Rather has our theory
of natural rights been a theory of the equal right of anybody to
get all he can out of the government. It did not stand in the
way of a high protective tariff, but rather helped along a log-
rolling tariff.
So with our natural resources and public domain. The home-
stead law and its many collateral timber, desert, and mining acts
were a conclusion from the natural right of anybody to get any-
thing that belonged to the government. I need only mention
the river and harbor and the public building appropriations.
They, like the tariff, logrolled the taxing power of the state. And
even the public offices in federal and state governments came to
be the natural and equal right of any individual.
No, our theory of natural rights has not been a laissez-faire
theory of government, but a pork-barrel theory. Not a let-alone
theory but a let's-grab theory. And it is embedded deep in our
every relation to the government, while the river and harbor bills
are its picturesque outcropping.
And this theory was roughly suited to the nineteenth century
of America. It was the century of conquest of Indians and Mex-
ico, of expansion and occupation westward, of civil war that
centralized power. But, unlike the theory that the state is power
for the sake of more power, it is a theory that the state is power
for the sake of individuals. Unlike the theory of laissez faire that
the state is a necessary evil, it is a theory that the state is the
political method by which individuals unite to use the sovereign
power for their own purposes.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:49:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
