Observation in Economics
35
the economic life. The study and presentation of the
facts will then occupy a separate field of its own; its cul-
tivation will be carried on by independent and intelligent
methods for certain definite, clearly prescribed ends.
Pending this happy deliverance, however, what can be
done for the student, and what can be done to save ob-
servation, induction, and the significance of facts so that
their importance will not be wholly lost?
Taking political economy as it is written, it is that
body of knowledge which treats of the relation of the
wants of men to things which will gratify these wants.
Even many of the authors who retain the classical defini-
tion of political economy as well as the traditional divi-
sion of the subject into four parts, in which emphasis
is put upon the physical world instead of psychical wants,
are influenced by this conception, and apparently would
prefer to treat the subject from the latter point of view.
Possibly they hesitate to make the change because it
breaks with past literature, or possibly because they feel
that under the newer treatment there is not the oppor-
tunity to use as large a supply of facts relating to the ma-
terial world as they think desirable in order to retain the
interest of their readers.
There are two fields for observation: first, the wants
of people, and, second, the things which they want. The
student understands far less in regard to this territory of
wants than the writers appear to take for granted. Au-
thors admit the importance of the classification and
analysis of the wants. Selecting two recent text-books at
random, from one I read that the question merits long
and careful study; and from the other: A first step is a
clear analysis of the character and motives of the busi-
ness man. And yet the first of the writers states that the
general answer to the question, What is the motive:
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:25:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
