but he seldom asks "What is the reaction of wealth upon the
efficiency of labor?"

According to the observations made by Mr. Frederick W.
Taylor, it does not pay to increase wages too rapidly. Indeed,
he has endeavored to give a mathematical expression to the possible
rate of economical increase and says that, if wages are
increased up to 60 per cent beyond the wages usually paid, this
increase tends to make the men more thrifty and better in every
way, but that when the rate goes beyond 60 per cent, many of
them tend to work irregularly and to become more lazy, shiftless,
extravagant, and dissipated.⁹

Economists have done little in the study of this phase of the
labor problem since Ricardo laid down the pessimistic view that
the population tends to increase with an increase in wages. Yet
it is a commonplace that, while an efficient population may be
seriously handicapped by the "niggardliness of nature," a country
with large natural resources may be likewise held back, because
the inhabitants either will not or can not utilize them, or because
they do not apply sufficient intelligence and energy in international
competition.

It is a matter of common observation that wealthy families in
our country often contain a number of parasitic members, that is,
members who derive a large income from society without rendering
any appreciable economic or public service in return.
These general and obvious facts need, however, to be examined
historically and statistically, in order to enable us to judge correctly
of the reaction of prosperity on the human mind, and of
the conditions which determine it. Intensive studies of heredity
in families, such as those made by Sir Francis Galton in England
and Dr. Frederick A. Woods and Dr. C. B. Davenport in our
country, are of great value, but need to be supplemented by a
study of the economic reactions. In the case of animal life, the
inherited characteristics are all important, and the skillful breeder
can reasonably expect to find the qualities of the parent in
the offspring. But if cows had the power to deliberately choose
a life of celibacy, we should find many a pedigreed Guernsey,
with ancestors in the advanced register, chewing her cud in idleness
on the hillside and yielding no milk whatsoever, just as we
often find sons of distinguished parents displaying real ability


**9 See Taylor's Principles of Scientific Management, p. 74.**