ANNUAL PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
295
principle can we see the tremendous waste of time and energy
that book-making has imposed on the scientific world. No group
of scientists has suffered more from this error than the economists.
We have had the misfortune of having our origin in the undifferen-
tiated field from which has also come the moralist, the political
scientist and the historian. As our traditions come from them
they give to our literature a form not fitting to its content. The
moralist and political scientist naturally cultivate fluency because
their contact with the public is mainly through spoken words.
The historian cultivates elegance and can hardly get started
before the third volume and the sociologist is quite as bad a model
because he starts with Adam and seldom gets beyond Moses.
In such company the economist seems to be a hybrid product
of book worms and hair splitters. In contrast with them his
instincts should be that of a bookkeeper and a cartoonist. He
should be orderly not fluent, clear and concise, not diffuse or
ornate. He should cultivate visual expression by using charts
and diagrams and arouse the imagination by striking phrases
and vivid contrasts. His vehicle should be the newspaper and
the magazine not the scientific journal. The public want what
we have and if we have something it does not want it is not worth
having. To be scientific is to be popular. There is no renown
worth having but that of the newspaper and the magazine and
the class room. To fail of appreciation in these quarters is a
confession of defects that prove a man's unfitness. A student
should go from us to fields less closely attached to the present
where other tests than the power of expression suffice to give
men standing and repute. There can be no economic literature
apart from general literature. We give the content to which
others give the form. To separate ourselves from the general
literary movements of the age is to deprive ourselves of influence
and literature of a content. Other, writers must be our spokes-
men; we must be their guide and inspiration. The place of the
economist is on the firing line of civilization; his product must be
clear, concise and impersonal, instead of being submerged in
bulky volumes and formal treatises. Our real affinity is with
the journalist, the magazine writer and the dramatist and not
with writers, who separated by time and space from what they
describe, function as critics of persons and events instead of being
actors in the momentous struggles of the present.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:19:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
