16
American Economic Association
Abnormal labor conditions.
The labor supply coming from countries of denser population
and with low standards of living creates, in some occupations, an
abnormally low level of wages and prices. Children can not be
born in American homes and raised on the American standard of
living cheaply enough to maintain at such low wages a continuous
supply of laborers. Many industries and branches of industry in
America are thus parasitical. A condition essentially patholog-
ical has come to be looked upon as normal. It is the commercial
ideal which imposes itself upon the minds of men in other circles.
The new immigration has recently been described by an author
who combines wide knowledge of the facts with keen sympathy for
the immigrant. He says: 2 "The past industrial development of
America points unerringly to Europe as the source whence our
unskilled labor supply is to be drawn. . . . America is in the
race for the markets of the world; its call for workers will not
cease." Yet a few pages further he must say: "All wage earners
in America agree that it is not as easy to make a living today as
it was twenty years ago, and the dollar does not go as far now as
it did then. The conflict for subsistence on the part of the wage
earner is growing more stern as we increase in numbers and indus-
trial life becomes more complicated, and the fact must be faced
that the vast army of workers must live more economically if
peace and well being are to prevail." Here is our argument: in-
crease in numbers is making the conflict for subsistence more stern.
But how different the conclusion!
The opposition to restriction.
What tremendous forces are combined in favor of a policy of
unrestricted immigration: sentiment and business, generosity, self-
ishness, laborers, employers. All men are prone to view immigra-
tion in its details, not in its entirety. They see this or that indi-
vidual or class advantage, not the larger national welfare. The
interests of capitalists and of the newly arriving immigrants are
abundantly considered; the interests of the mass of the people now
here are overlooked.
The depressing effect of the ever present and ever renewing
supply of immigrant labor upon wages, appears most clearly at
the time of wage contests, and often seems to be the most impor-
* Peter Roberts, in The New Immigration, 1912, preface, p. viii, and p. 47.
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:45:05 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
