12
American Economic Association
the eighteenth century's interpretation of natural rights, freedom
of contract, individual liberty and competition. They seem to
think that having worked this constitution into a form where the
court is the actual determiner of public policy, and the consequent
definer of the rights of property, this condition can be maintained
indefinitely.
The attempt to justify the exercise of this power by the courts
rather than by the legislatures, is based on the theory that the
courts are the safest organ of society, because they are out of
politics. The exact contrary is the fact, as can be easily deter-
mined by a reference to our own history, as well as to that of Great
Britain. The people will always accomplish their ends in the long
run, through political agitation and governmental action.
The courts are less well informed in regard to public opinion
and sound public policy than the legislatures. The whole effect
of turning such a power over to the courts is not to maintain the
status quo, or to prevent changes in property rights, but simply
to hold those changes in check and to delay them until peaceful
settlement becomes much more difficult, if not impossible. Chisholm
vs. Georgia led quickly to a constitutional amendment. The intro-
duction of the police power by the courts of New York made the
New York judiciary elective in 1846. The Dred Scott decision
was wiped out by blood and treasure. The declaring of the income
tax unconstitutional twenty years ago resulted in constitutional
amendment. The decisions on hours of labor, sanitation, and the
like, such as Lochner vs. New York, have led to a universal demand
that the people shall have direct political power over the courts.
This takes the form of an agitation for the recall of judges, or for
the recall of judicial decisions on constitutional questions. The
decisons in the railroad rate cases by which so many statutes have
been declared unconstitutional have intensified the popular move-
ments for direct popular control of the courts. The recent trust
decisions and the "rule of reason" evoke a demand for the limita-
tion of the power of the courts by statute or by constitutional
amendment.
It remains to be seen whether or not the courts will formally
reverse themselves,-whether as a result of the agitation they will
become very much more sensitive to popular opinion and come to
understand it better, and reverse themselves in fact but not in
form, or whether we shall have by constitutional amendment an
elective federal judiciary for limited term, perhaps accompanied
This content downloaded from 138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:47:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
