Congress naturally could not wait. So it cut the knot and turned
to other business. The decision which Congress reached was seem-
ingly devoid of justification in theory and had been rejected by all
trained students who had faced the problem. Twenty years earlier,
our first president, General Walker, had characterized a similar
solution as losing "all hold on any principle governing the matter."
During the following decade members of the group continued a
spasmodic discussion of the apportionment problem among them-
selves and with others, and, in 1910, when it again became urgent,
a solution had been worked out which could hardly have occurred
to any one of the group alone or to any member of Congress. The
solution commended itself to the House Committee on the Census,
aroused no opposition in House or Senate, and was speedily fol-
lowed in the law. The fact that these members of our Association
have contributed to elucidate the difficult problem may justify the
choice of a theme remote from the field of economics as traditionally
interpreted.
A few months before the group was brought together the presi-
dent of the Association, in closing his annual address, had said:
"I believe that the largest opportunity of our economists in the
immediate future lies not in theories but in practice, not with stu-
dents but with statesmen, not in the education of individual citi-
zens, however widespread and salutary, but in the leadership of an
organized body politic.2
It is somewhat in the spirit of President Hadley's speech at New
Haven that I ask your attention to this theme. My immediate ob-
ject is to present the reasons for believing that the problem of
apportionment under the provisions of the Constitution, a technical
problem to which at intervals through more than a century the
attention of Congress, executive officers, and statistical experts
had been directed, with only temporary and provisional success, has
at length been solved by reconciling the demands of Congress with
the conditions imposed by theory. My remote object is to show
that the ground has been cleared for renewing under more favorable
auspices that effort to check the steady and rapid increase in the
size of the House of Representatives which was made in 1850 and
abandoned in 1870.
Only two provisions of the Constitution bear on the present
problem, one that "representatives . . . shall be apportioned
among the several states . . . according to their respective num-