eighteen millions of dollars. In other words, for every dollar
given by the federal government the states have contributed,
roughly speaking, eight dollars in addition. A more striking il-
lustration of the stimulating effect of a wise grant of public money
for a definite purpose has, I think, rarely been afforded.
The contribution of this system of schools to the wealth of this
country is something which can hardly be estimated. It has first
of all trained the youth of the country for practical occupation
in the field of agriculture and engineering in such a way as to
raise the level of the practice of these professions throughout the
United States.
It has also contributed very greatly in addition to our knowl-
edge of the conditions under which a productive agriculture and
a productive industry may be developed. It has been estimated
that the benefits of the discoveries emanating from these centers
of agricultural and engineering education has been such as to give
a positive increase in national wealth in every single year larger
than the total cost of all these institutions from the beginning to
the present.
Surely in the light of these facts it cannot be said that, prac-
tically speaking, education has not been recognized as a function
of the federal government. As a matter of fact, it has been so
recognized to such an extent as to establish the principle beyond
question.
But after all, the federal government has done comparatively
little aside from the land grants-which, it is true, were an
important contribution-to stimulate, or aid in, the support of
elementary or secondary education. It is interesting to note that
this grant on the part of the federal government to higher educa-
tion was supplementary to the work which was doing in the states
themselves in this field. It did not undertake to endow the Amer-
ican college of the traditional type or to endow professional
education. The men who were behind this measure seemed to
think that those particular phases of national education would
take care of themselves. The grant was made definitely for the
purpose of developing the practical side of higher education, of
training for callings and professions for which no training had
been, up to that time, provided in the educational system, either
public or private.
This was a wise measure. First of all it was a strategic move
to ask the federal government to give money in aid of education