Government Control of Economic Life
5
lation, shall be the dominating principle of civilization at a
particular period, depends on which one of them is likely, under
existing conditions of knowledge and resources, most largely to
promote welfare. When evils flow from the too extensive appli-
cation of the prevailing principle, or, when, in new circumstances,
it is less productive of welfare, emphasis is gradually shifted until
the other principle occupies the foreground and becomes the domi-
nating force. Such is the situation now. Conditions have changed
so that the necessity and value of regulation are emphasized again.
The régime of personal freedom of competition under the condi-
tions of rapid scientific discovery and material growth has failed
to preserve, or perhaps to produce, the equality necessary for
success among competitors. Growing population, the develop-
ment of vast resources, the great size of units of industry, have
made the application of the competitive principle in many ways.
impracticable. Competition has degenerated at many points from
a struggle between equals to an exploitation of the weak by the
strong. Industry has been swallowed up by industry until in
many lines a practical monopoly exists, so that prices, wages,
terms of employment, and the welfare of large numbers of people,
are in the control of comparatively few. The benefits of the com-
mon heritage of natural resources have passed too largely from
the people at large. On all sides we find private monopolies and
a natural system of capitalistic industry, involving large control
of the opportunity for livelihood for the many. These evils have
been produced, under conditions favorable to the acquisition of
great wealth and its massing under the corporate principle, by
a system that gave the world a “democratic constitution," "the
same law for all," "toleration," "capitalistic competition," "indi-
vidual initiative," and the other benefits of liberalism.
general terms, the causes for the extension of government control
are: the ill-doing of some under the competitive system; our desire
for rapid national development, which led us to give large powers
to those who were to assume the risks of frontier promotion―
powers which, then innocuous, have now become dangerous—; a
demand for a better standard of living by the great body of the
working class, who are asking with some show of reason what the
advances in science and industry have done for them. Moreover,
there is a feeling of resentment of control by others of their
opportunity to make a living.
In more
The demand for state regulation either for the purpose of
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:46:22 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
