10
American Economic Association
is especially augmented in value by the improvement. The special
assessment, as pointed out by T. S. Adams, is a kind of excess-
profits tax. It is a tax on the unearned increment, and large
sums of money for public improvements are raised in this way.
In every case of a public improvement we see a contest, or at
least a contrast, between the special-benefit theory and the pork-
barrel theory. The state and federal governments are still in
the pork-barrel stage. Rivers, harbors, and public buildings are
paid for out of taxes upon the nation as a whole, instead of by
assessments on the local real estate owners who are benefited.
These three classes of decisions regarding the value of property
have changed the definition of property itself. Property is no
longer the eighteenth century notion of holding a physical thing
exclusively for one's own use, but property is value; value is power
over others; and the court protects not necessarily the unregu-
lated market value, but the reasonable value of property, against
confiscation by the voters.
The political and judicial contests of the future, as in the
recent past, turn on the power of the state and the power of
private property; and their issue is the kind and extent of state
control over the values of private property. It is this issue that
is forced upon us more acutely by the world war.
In the westward movement of our population during the eight-
eenth and nineteenth centuries, the pioneers and settlers were
led on, not mainly by the expectation of daily earnings, but by the
expectation of future increments of land value.
The pioneers
were speculators. The same principle underlies all business. The
so-called watered stock which promoters and financiers give to
themselves and sell to others in starting a business is their claim
to the speculative value, which they expect the business eventually
to make good. Without this speculative element, in one form
or another, private enterprise will not take hold of an investment.
But speculation acquired a new importance in the latter part
of the nineteenth century. During three-quarters of the century,
as has often been pointed out, there remained free resources to
the west, and private enterprise was busy in occupying these re-
sources. During the latter part of the century these resources
were occupied and investors turned back and bid against each
other for the resources already occupied.
So, in the early period, the increase in value of the occupied
resources was limited by the opportunity to go elsewhere, and
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:49:30 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
