36
American Economic Association
force? is so simple that it seems almost self-evident, and
the second writes: The motives to business activity are
too familiar to require analysis.
If the present method of exposition is to persist, the
student may well tarry for a longer period than the con-
sideration of the few pages usually allotted to this topic
demands. It is possible for the student to do practice work
in classifying these wants. In his own experience he has
a laboratory, and by observation he can add other data.
Some of the text-books which are pedagogically provided
with questions recognize in some slight measure the de-
sirability of this process and the possibility of under-
taking it. From my point of view the discussion of these
questions, and the procedure to be followed for their
analysis, should at least precede, if not in a large meas-
ure be substituted for, the text which is now given.
Why ask a student whether food, tobacco, medicine,
whiskey, a pack of gambler's cards, or a wooden leg, is
wealth; but rather, who wants food, whiskey, or a
wooden leg? and why, and how much does he want the
given wooden leg? From a consideration of wants alone,
I believe that an extensive tract of economic life could.
be surveyed, a survey which would acquaint the student
with a large mass of material arranged under a methodi-
cal scheme; and, what is perhaps of more importance,
the acquaintance of these facts would give vividness and
reality to the subsequent exercise in reasoning.
It will, however, be objected that it is not necessary
to put a student through a prolonged course of wants in
order to undertake the series of rigorous exercises in ab-
stract reasoning; that observations on the six sacks of
wheat are all that is necessary to grasp the idea of mar-
ginal utility and its related progeny. This may be
granted, though with some doubt; but I assume that the
This content downloaded from
138.110.143.49 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 03:25:10 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
