sophisticated calculation. Our earlier discussion
did discuss at least one change in the norms
regarding bequests, but that resulted from a very
large change in people's orientation. It resulted
from changes in their conception of the family--
of their own place within it and of the place of
their heirs. That also occurred over a very long
run-over the course of centuries.
B. Life-Cycle Hypothesis
Regarding the life-cycle hypothesis, we ar-
gued that consumption depends upon current
income because norms regarding how much
people think they should spend are linked to
it. But such a norm Wyould be highly unlikely
to change as a result'of the use of fiscal and
monetary policy for stabilization. In the first
place, such stabilization will make the adher-
ence to the norm less costly, not more costly,
in purely economic terms. Furthermore, mac-
roeconomic sources are responsible for only a
small fraction of the variation in individual
incomes. As a result, there is further reason
why the role of current income in norms is
unlikely to change as a result of macroeco-
nomic stabilization.
C. Cash Flow and Investment
The rise of the CFO suggests that norms
regarding investment have changed in large US
firms. Quite possibly, this change occurred be-
cause firms realized the need for financial con-
trols that compared the returns on inside and
outside options. Such an endogenous response
would make Modigliani-Miller correct. But,
following Zorn (2004), this change took 40
years. In the meantime, in the short run, follow-
ing our earlier logic, investments would have
depended on cash flow. And, of course, even in
the long run the CFO, who is only one voice
among many in corporate decisions, may not be
fully effective.
D. Natural Rate Hypothesis and the Role of
Rational Expectations
Regarding the natural rate hypothesis and
also the rational expectations hypothesis, we
saw that they will no longer hold if norms of
price and wage setting have nominal compo-
nents. Regarding prices and wages, the most  powerful evidence in favor of norms comes
from employees' resistance to money wage
cuts and customers' resistance to nominal
price increases. As long as inflation is low, it
is doubtful that small changes in inflation will
affect such norms. People seem to find it
easier to think in nominal, rather than in real,
terms. Indeed the facilitation of such thinking
is one of the benefits of money according to
the textbook mantra on its three uses: for
transactions, as a store of value, and as a unit
of account. Money is useful as a unit of
account especially if people think in nominal,
rather than in real, terms. As a result, as long
as inflation is low, people are unlikely to
forsake making calculations in nominal terms,
especially regarding the norms of what wages
or prices should be. Of course, if inflation
increases to high levels, the norms for wages
and prices and the method of calculating
those norms will change. Exactly how they
change-with the possibility that they under-
adjust to increases in inflation when it is low
and overadjust when it is high-should be
empirically investigated.
E. Where Do the Norms Come From?
We do not know the general answer to the
question where norms come from. This lecture
has tried to make the case that norms, such as
they are, could potentially play an important
role in macroeconomics. Hopefully, then, it has
added to the motivation for research on their
microfoundations.88
XI. Conclusion
This lecture has shown that the early Keyne-
sians got a great deal of the working of the
economic system right, in ways that are denied
by the five neutralities. As quoted from Keynes
earlier, they based their models on "our knowl-
edge of human nature and from the detailed
facts of experience." They used their intuitions
regarding the norms of how consumers, inves-
tors, and wage and price setters thought they