of productivity increase and price
inflation-is the same as the trend in
wages. But in some markets the equilibrium
wage will be rising faster, and in
others slower, than the economy-wide
wage trend.
A "natural rate" result follows if actual
wage increases feed fully into the equilibrium
components of future wage increases.
There will be acceleration whenever the
non-linear disequilibrium effects are on
average positive, and steady inflation, that
is stochastically steady inflation, only at
unemployment rates high enough to make
the disequilibrium effects wash out. Phillips
tradeoffs exist in the short run, and
the time it takes for them to evaporate
depends on the lengths of the lags with
which today's actual wage gains become
tomorrow's standards.
A rather minor modification may preserve
Phillips tradeoffs in the long run.
Suppose there is a floor on wage change in
excess supply markets, independent of the
amount of excess supply and of the past
history of wages and prices. Suppose, for
example, that wage change is never negative;
it is either zero or what the response
function says, whichever is algebraically
larger. So long as there are markets where
this floor is effective, there can be determinate
rates of economy-wide wage inflation
for various levels of aggregate demand.
Markets at the floor do not increase their
contributions to aggregate wage inflation
when overall demand is raised. Nor is their
contribution escalated to actual wage
experience. But the frequency of such
markets diminishes, it is true, both with
overall demand and with inflation. The
floor phenomenon can preserve a Phillips
tradeoff within limits, but one that becomes
ever more fragile and vanishes as
greater demand pressure removes markets
from contact with the zero floor. The
model implies a long-run Phillips curve
that is very flat for high unemployment
and becomes vertical at a critically low
rate of unemployment.
These implications seem plausible and
even realistic. It will be objected, however,
that any permanent floor independent of
general wage and price history and expectation
must indicate money illusion.
The answer is that the floor need not be
permanent in any single market. It could
give way to wage reduction when enough
unemployment has persisted long enough.
But with stochastic intersectoral shifts of
demand, markets are always exchanging
roles, and there can always be some markets,
not always the same ones, at the floor.
This model avoids the empirically questionable
implication of the usual natural
rate hypothesis that unemployment rates
only slightly higher than the critical rate
will trigger ever-accelerating deflation.
Phillips curves seem to be pretty flat at
high rates of unemployment. During the
great contraction of 1930-33, wage rates
were slow to give way even in the face of
massive unemployment and substantial
deflation in consumer prices. Finally in
1932 and 1933 money wage rates fell more
sharply, in response to prolonged unemployment,
layoffs, shutdowns, and to
threats and fears of more of the same.
I have gone through this example to
make the point that irrationality, in the
sense that meaningless differences in
money values permanently affect individual
behavior, is not logically necessary for
the existence of a long-run Phillips tradeoff.
In full long-run equilibrium in all
markets, employment and unemployment
would be independent of the levels and
rates of change of money wage rates and
prices. But this is not an equilibrium that
the system ever approaches. The economy
is in perpetual sectoral disequilibrium
even when it has settled into a stochastic
macro-equilibrium.
I suppose that one might maintain that
asymmetry in wage adjustment and temporary