irons, lamps, telephones, toasters, refrigerators,
radios, and washing machines. It was this
consumerism that led such progressive critics
of the era as Vernon Louis Parrington, pioneer
in the development of intellectual history, to
decry the "cash-register" mentality of modern
urban life (Parrington, 1930 p. 81).
The economist's traditional measures of income
inequality are inadequate measures of
both egalitarian gains and egalitarian failures
(cf., Amartya K. Sen, 1996). They focus on a
variable- money income-that currently accounts
for less than half of real consumption
and which in a generation may slip to just a
quarter of real consumption. The most serious
threats to egalitarian progress-certainly the
most intractable forms of poverty-are related
to the unequal distribution of spiritual (immaterial)
resources (cf., William Julius
Wilson, 1996).
Realization of the potential of an individual
is not something that can be legislated by the
state, nor can it be provided to the weak by the
strong. It is something that has to develop
within each individual. Moreover, which aspect
of one's potential an individual chooses
to develop most fully, such as choosing a profession,
is purely an aesthetic consideration.
John Dewey and one of his chief disciples,
Richard Rorty of the University of Virginia,
contend that in a democracy self-realization is
"4a particularized creative project of individual
growth" (Richard Shusterman, 1994 pp. 396-
97). The emphasis on individual choice does
not mean that other individuals and institutions
play no role in shaping those choices. Quite
the contrary, the quality of the choices and the
range of opportunity depends critically on how
well endowed an individual is with spiritual
resources. But the spiritual resources needed
for personal development are unequally distributed
among young and old, among men
and women, among various ethnic groups, and
among rich and poor. Those rich who are continuously
preoccupied with sensual gratifications
are as likely to fail in self-realization as
the poor who share that preoccupation. Although
the rich may have the wealth to buy
the treatment needed from highly trained professionals,
inexpensive character and religious
counseling may serve as well, if not better, for
the addicts of all classes.
The full list of maldistributed spiritual resources
is too long to discuss adequately here
but I have in mind such vital assets as a vision
of opportunity and a work ethic. A common
characteristic of such assets is that they are
transferred from one individual to another
mainly very early in the life of the recipient.
Self-esteem and a sense of family solidarity
begin to be transferred to children along with
mother's milk and with pabulum. Other spiritual
resources begin to be transferred during
the toddler and toilet-training stages, including
a sense of discipline, a capacity to resist or
control impulses, and a sense of community.
Telling nursery rhymes such as "TThis little
piggy went to market," recounting the autobiographies
of the mother and father, and family
histories going back two or three
generations convey such spiritual resources as
a work ethic, a sense of the mainstream of
work and life, an ethic of benevolence, a vision
of opportunity, and a thirst for knowledge.
Although these early transfers of spiritual
resources are enriched and expanded by primary,
secondary, and college education, and
by occupational and other later-life experiences,
the salience of these later transfers depends
in no small measure on what happens at
home before formnal education begins. It is,
therefore, necessary to remedy the maldistribution
of spiritual resources early in life, because
the most spiritually deprived infants will
often be born to single, teenaged mothers who
are themselves spiritually deprived.
Some young mothers are too deprived, or
too young, to call on their own life experiences
to transmit a sense of discipline and of opportunity,
a work ethic, a family ethic, a sense of
self-esteem, and a knowledge of the mainstream
of work and life. The deprivation can
be addressed by promoting a system of mentoring,
taking advantage of the increasingly
large number of retired men and women who
have abundant -spiritual resources. Such mentoring
programs would be useful, not only for
the toddlers and their mothers and fathers, but
also for the elderly who are looking for ways
to enrich their retirement years.
Despite the improvements in their material
conditions of life, including comfortable
stocks of consumer durables, the elderly today
suffer from a maldistribution of immaterial