one thing well and exploit it over and over
again. Talents are multidimensional in general,
so those who go on to college are better at
college jobs than those individuals who do not
go on to college. But the converse is also true:
Those who opt against college are better at their
jobs than those who complete college would be
at noncollege jobs. Rather than strict hierarchy,
comparative and even some absolute advantage
play important roles.
This essay has explored three themes: Mar-
kets value diversity, markets sort buyers and
sellers appropriately to take advantage of heter-
ogeneous talents and tastes, and sorting and
choice create income inequality.
Value is determined in diverse markets in the
standard way, equating supply with demand.
The difference is that there are more margins on
which to operate. Not only is quantity a choice
variable, but consumers and producers can sub-
stitute along varying dimensions of quality.
Equilibrium is established when no seller can be
made better off by altering the quality of his
product and offering it to different buyers and
when no buyer can be made better off by sub-
stituting a different quality good for the one that
he currently consumes.
Just as value is determined by market equi-
librium, so too is the allocation of buyers to
sellers set by the market. Sellers who have a
comparative advantage in producing high-
quality products sell to consumers who are will-
ing to pay a sufficient premium for additional
quality. Conversely, sellers who have a compar-
ative advantage in producing low-quality goods
cheaply cater to consumers who prefer to sub-
stitute away from high quality so that they can
spend the saved dollars on other goods.
Finally, income inequality results from heter-
ogeneity. Some of this is determined by nature
as individuals are born with different abilities,
but inequality is also manufactured by actions
that individuals take. The most obvious actions
involve investments in human capital, either
through formal schooling or work experience.
Such investments create inequality, but are ben-
eficial to individuals and society as a whole
because they improve the overall standard of
living. A more subtle variant involves gambles
that individuals take as they choose to enter
risky occupations or make risky investments.
Because of indivisibilities, risky payoffs allow
individuals to couple the consumption of large
amounts of some goods with high-quality ver-
sions of others, such as living in expensive
cities when income turns out to be high. Losers
of occupational lotteries combine their lower
consumption with lower-quality indivisible
goods, consuming less and living in less expen-
sive cities. Expected utility is higher than it
would be, absent this type of inequality.
Markets value diversity. Individuals, using
their respective talents and different prefer-
ences, respond to these valuations and create
important induced differentiation in consump-
tion patterns, earnings, and occupational choices.