of an interval of real numbers has long been
familiar in descriptions of economic data. It
became familiar in economic theory as well
after Robert J. Aumann (1964) showed that,
in a pure exchange economy composed of
insignificant agents, the formation of destabilizing
coalitions is prevented if and only if
all those agents base their decisions on a
price system.
The concept of a convex set (i.e., a set
containing the segment connecting any two
of its points) had repeatedly been placed at
the center of economic theory before 1964.
It appeared in a new light with the introduction
of integration theory in the study of
economic competition: if one associates with
every agent of an economy an arbitrary set
in the commodity space and if one averages
those individual sets over a collection of
insignificant agents, then the resulting set is
necessarily convex.2 But explanations of the
three functions of prices taken as examples
can be made to rest on the convexity of sets
derived by that averaging process. Convexity
in the commodity space obtained by aggregation
over a collection of insignificant
agents is an insight that economic theory
owes in its revealing clarity to integration
theory.
An economist who experiences such an
insight belongs to the group of applied
mathematicians, whose values he espouses.
Mathematics provides him with a language
and a method that permit an effective study
of economic systems of forbidding complexity;
but it is a demanding master. It ceaselessly
asks for weaker assumptions, for
stronger conclusions, for greater generality.
In taking a mathematical form, economic
theory is driven to submit to those demands.
The gains in generality that it has achieved
as a result, in little more than a century,
stand out when the first formulations of
the theories of general equilibrium (Leon
Walras, 1874-1877) and of the core of an
economy (Francis Y. Edgeworth, 1881 pp.
34-8) are placed side by side with the recent
treatments of those subjects to which
The New Palgrave is an introduction and a
bibliographical key (John Eatwell et al.,
1987-1989). Walras's consumers and producers
have been freed from many of their
constraining characteristics; Edgeworth's
universe of two consumers and two commodities
has been vastly expanded.
Mathematics also dictates the imperative
of simplicity. It relentlessly searches for
short transparent proofs and for the theoretical
frameworks in which they will be
inserted. Participating in that pursuit, economic
theory was sometimes drawn by drives
toward greater generality and toward greater
simplicity in the same direction, rather than
in opposite directions. Cohort after cohort,
students of consumer theory have learned
about the concept of decreasing marginal
rate of substitution for two commodities on
an indifference curve and about its extension
to the multicommodity case. Notably
more general, and notably simpler, is the
concept of convexity of the set of points
preferred to a given point in the commodity
space. Welfare economics presents another
instance. One of its main theorems formulates
precisely the principle enunciated by
Adam Smith (1776). If all the agents of an
economy are in equilibrium relative to a
price system, then they utilize their collective
resources optimally. The proof of that
theorem (Kenneth J. Arrow, 1951) has become
so simple that it can be given without
mathematical symbols. It is, at the same
time, of utmost generality; in relating two
basic concepts of economic theory to each
other, it uses no assumption.
In its attempts to attain its many objectives,
economic theory was helped by greater
abstraction. Preference theory supplies an
example again. Significant research efforts
were expended on solutions of the integrability
problem. That problem can be bypassed
altogether, and greater simplicity can
be achieved by moving from the commodity
space to the more abstract space of the
pairs of its points. In this space, whose
dimension is twice the number of commodities,
the pairs of commodity points indifferent
to each other are now assumed to
form a smooth (hyper)surface. As another
instance of the generality permitted by abstraction,
consider the notion of a commod-
20n this direct consequence of a theorem of A. A.
Lyapunov, see Karl Vind (1964).