change, we might find better use for the
money.
I have mentioned one use: directly investing
to improve the economies of the poorer
countries. Another would be direct investment
in preserving species, ecosystems, or
wilderness areas. There is concern that many
ecosystems could not migrate as rapidly as
climate may change in the coming century;
there has been little investigation of what
might be done to facilitate the migration of
ecosystems if the alternative is to invest 5 or
10 trillions of dollars in the reduction of
carbon emissions.
VI
What can be done to reduce or offset
carbon emissions? Reducing energy use and
the carbon content of energy have received,
I believe properly, most of the attention,
especially the attention of economists. There
are other possibilities to mention.
Trees store carbon. In growing, they take
it out of the atmosphere. When they rot or
burn it goes back into the atmosphere. A
new forest will absorb carbon until it reaches
maturity (i.e., maximum carbon density) in
75 or 100 years. If it then merely replenishes
itself, with new growth replacing the
oxidized dead trees, it holds its carbon but
does not absorb more. If trees are harvested,
the lumber that becomes house
frames or furniture may last a hundred years
or more; removing mature trees and storing
them anaerobically is possible but expensive.
The most recent report of the National
Academy of Sciences considered that reforestation
in the United States might sequester
2-3 percent of current global
carbon dioxide emissions.3 The prospects
for that kind of reforestation in the rest of
the world are not nearly so promising, and
we should conclude that reforestation can
contribute, but not greatly.
Stopping or slowing deforestation is important
for reasons other than carbon emissions
but is quantitatively more important
than reforestation. Reforestation is unlikely
to take up as much as 100 billion tons of
carbon; deforestation, in areas where deforestation
is likely, could contribute several
hundred billion tons of carbon, partly because
forest subsoils contain carbon typically
greater than the amount in the trees
themselves, and this carbon is subject to
oxidation when the trees are removed.
Carbon can be "scrubbed" from stack
gases, probably not with any known technology
that would make such removal economically
competitive with reducing emissions.
(Part of the expense is disposing of sludge;
where gaseous carbon might be pumped
into the ocean or into underground cavities,
economical disposal may prove feasible.)
Parallel to reforestation is the idea of enhancing
oceanic photosynthesis, by "fertilizing"
the oceans, possibly with iron, if enough
of the carbon residues from the enhanced
growth will sink rather than remain near the
surface. Experiments would probably be reversible
and modest in scale; their political
acceptability may be tested in the near future.

Finally-although nothing is final in a
subject as new as the one we are talking
about-there are numerous possibilities for
putting substances or objects in orbit or in
the stratosphere to reflect something like 1
percent of incoming sunlight to offset a large
part of the radiation imbalance caused by
greenhouse gases. Some of these are as
apparently innocuous as stimulating cloud
formation, and some are as dramatic as
huge mylar balloons in low earth orbit. Until
very recently these possibilities were
nearly unmentionable, but they have recently
been dignified by inclusion, along with
caveats about "large unknowns concerning
possible environmental side effects," in the
1991 report of the National Academy of
Sciences. I shall not pursue them here, except
for two observations. First, if in decades
to come the greenhouse impact begins to
confirm the more alarmist expectations, and
if the economic sacrifices required to reduce