for retirees geared to the then-current cost of
health care plus an opportunity for individuals
during their working years to accumulate funds
in retirement health savings accounts. These
combined funds could be used at retirement to
pay for the type of health plan that the retiree
prefers: a comprehensive insurance plan of the
type that Medicare now provides; membership
in a health maintenance organization that provides
a managed care plan; or a lower cost plan
with substantial deductibles and coinsurance.
Alternatively, working age individuals could
use the funds contributed annually to their retirement
health savings account to purchase
health insurance for their retirement years,
thereby minimizing the problem of asymmetric
information in policy choice at retirement
that would occur in buying insurance after
retirement.
VII. Conclusion
The reform of social insurance is clearly a
work in progress in the United States and in
other countries as well. Policymakers can do
much to improve the major social insurance
programs that protect the unemployed, the aged,
and the ill. Economists can contribute to this
process by improving our understanding of the
effect of social insurance rules and by deriving
new program designs. In this paper I have emphasized
the use of personal investment-based
accounts created and regulated by the government
and earmarked for unemployment benefits,
for retirement income, and for health care
during retirement. Such accounts have the potential
to provide a better tradeoff of increased
protection and reduced distortion. They also
give individuals greater discretion in tailoring
benefits to their own tastes.
I am an optimist about economic policy. I
have examined what is wrong with our current
social insurance programs and what could be
done to improve them in the future. I believe
that the policy process does evolve and that
economists have contributed to that evolution.
We see that in the important reforms of the past
two decades that I have described. But there is
still much for economists to do in designing
better policies for the future and in educating
the public and the political decision makers
about the desirability of making such changes.