enough. We must rather balance the " budget"
exclusive of Social Security trust funds.
These latter will be showing increasing surpluses
over the years ahead until, by moderate
estimate, they will in the year 2030 attain
a total accumulation of $12 trillion. From
that point they would presumably be drained
down to support the final declining years of
the baby boomers of a few decades ago.
Is the fiction of putting what the government
collects from the public in a different
pot likely to prevent serious deflationary
consequences of years of major real budget
surpluses? Or would the equal fiction that
they are not federal spending avoid the inflationary
consequences of large payouts in
excess of revenues half a century from now?
Fiscal policy based on such measures can
indeed create havoc.
This is all the more so because of the
interaction of these faulty proposed measures
and others that I have cited. Provision
of generous real support to large cohorts of
future retirees by reduced cohorts of those
working may well prove a problem. Aside
from having more people working and fewer
retired, it can only be met by raising the
productivity of those working. That may be
accomplished in part by increasing their endowment
of business plant and equipment,
which dominates conventional measures of
investment, although it may be doubted that
much of current business capital expenditures
will have much directly to do with
productivity in 2030.27
I may add that neither good (Keynesian!)
theory nor empirical evidence suggests that
budget surpluses and reduced consumption
are likely to contribute to more business
investment of any kind. To be confident that
they would, one would have to believe that
the reductions in interest rates that they
might generate would increase investment
demand more than the reductions in consumption
and output would decrease it. The
reasons for doubt are of course to be found
in John M. Keynes, and their formal theoretical
formulation in Oscar Lange's (1938), (I
hope not forgotten) distinguished article of
half a century ago on the "Optimal Propensity
to Consume." Some decades of work on
investment functions and the role of output
and accelerator effects versus that of interest
rates and costs of capital, to which I confess
to having contributed my share,28 would
seem to offer ample empirical support for
that doubt.
But fuller and more appropriate measures
of investment and productivity might make
clear that the best and perhaps the only
feasible way to provide the sustenance of our
future aged is to develop our public, social
infrastructure and endow our young with all
of the education, training, research output,
and good health that our society is capable
of offering. One or two more generations
with large proportions of illiterates and
semiliterates will hardly produce a labor
force adequately equipped for productive
employment in the 21st century. This suggests
to me that the Social Security surpluses
should be invested in education and training,
research and development, public health, and
the public infrastructure which is the necessary
foundation for private production. If we
had federal budget and national accounting
measures that properly classified all of this
vital capital accumulation, the choice of wise
public policy, and the economic analysis on
which it would build, might be much easier.
V. Conclusion
Economic science can boast of many advances
over the years. Too many sins of
policymakers have been falsely attributed to
a profession whose counsel has too frequently
been compromised or ignored. I am
fond, to illustrate, of comparing the challenge
to prescribe a (painless?) cure for inflation
to the cry of the patient who comes to
the doctor complaining of myriad ills and
says "Doc! Make me well, but don't tell me
to exercise, lose the hundred pounds that I