economic theorist seldom asks. An exception
should be made for the relevant literature
in the field of labor economics. Similarly,
some exception should be made for
the recent literature on human capital, but
at best it is only a partial exception.5 The
mathematically inclined general theorist
continues to show little interest in the determinants
of the personal distribution of
income and wealth.6 It has been said by
George Stigler that: "The problem of personal
income distribution will eventually
receive much theoretical attention, since
it is a problem of all economies and all
times" (p. 22). (Compare Becker, p. 135.)
But if the problem is so important, why
only "eventually"? It is not surprising
that many younger economists are seeking
a radical alternative for the neoclassical
framework, more or less along Marxian
lines. And it is also this concern with the
unequal personal distribution of opportunity
and income which has led to the
development of models of a dual labor market.
These models, with their emphasis on
institutional barriers to labor mobility,
offer some valuable insights into the operation
of contemporary labor markets, and
they also raise important questions about
some of the assumptions implicit in neoclassical
theory.7
From the point of view of human welfare-
a concept that will not go away no
matter how uncomfortable it makes the
economic theorist-can we ignore the personal
distribution of income? Which is
more relevant: a rigorous demonstration as
to how resources can be most efficiently
allocated under ideal conditions that have
never existed, or a much cruder exploration
of how wealth and income came to be distributed
as they in fact are and what might
be done to affect the distribution of income
in one way or another? As Alice Rivlin put
it in her Ely lecture last year (p. 2), economists
"worth their pay" ought to be able
to explain the shape of the income distribution
and why it is changing or not changing.
By this criterion very few of us are
worth our pay.8 To go further, why do
we have so little to say about the intergenerational
movement among occupational
and income classes, about the determinants
of the distribution of income
relative to those affecting the distribution
of wealth, and about the ethnic, social, political,
and regional factors affecting the
distribution of both wealth and income?
Am I suggesting that economic theory
become much more normative than it now
is? Of course I am not. "Relevant" and
"normative" are not synonyms, and what
I am alleging here is that neoclassical economics
has failed to be relevant in its
refusal to deal with the personal distribution
of income and wealth. This refusal
stems, I presume, fron the fact that, with
the analytical tools at hand, the problem
has seemed too difficult.
I should add in this connection that neoclassical
economics has always had a normative
slant. As others have suggested,
I In the second edition of Human Capital, pp. 94-144,
Becker republishes his earlier attempt to utilize the
human capital approach to sketch out a theory of per-  sonal income distributioin. See also Jacob Mincer.
6 On the various approaches to the study of the distribution
of income, see the useful volumes by Martin
Bronfenbrenner and Jan Pen. Interestingly, some  three-quarters or more of Bronfenbrenner's book is de-  voted to the functional distribution of income; only one
chapter is devoted entirely to "Topics in Personal Income
Distribution." Yet one reviewer criticized him, as
well as Pen, for devoting too much space "to the distributional
influence of institutional forces and to the
personal, as against functional, distribution of income"
(Charles E. Ferguson, p. 440). Pen's volume contains
a useful summary of the more important recent literature
on the determinants of the personal distribution
of income; and, interestingly, his longest chapter is
concerned with "norms and policies" for income redistribution.

7 Compare Arthur Okun (1973, pp. 237-46) and
Michael Wachter and the references there cited. Cairnes
and Marshall, of course, did talk about noncompeting
groups, but little of this has carried over into the main
body of current economic theory.
8 One who has recently earned his salary is Okun
(1975); see also James E. Meade and Alan Blinder. An
earlier example of an economist who "bucked the
trend" to discuss the personal distribution of income and
wealth was Hugh Dalton.