helium resulting from productive combustion
of the host gas, and store the
helium instead.

Step iv: Build new helium separation
plants on helium-rich gas streams. Store
the helium.

Step v: Delay the use of helium-rich
gas fields, undeveloped, and already producing.


Ultimate Step: Extract helium from the
atmosphere.

The ultimate step is not included in the
report of the Committee, but is mentioned
in the transcript, page 135, of the Public
Forum held as part of the study. It involves
a process that by present technology costs a
large multiple of the cost of extraction from
natural gas containing .3 to .5 percent
helium.

Steps i, iii, iv, and the "ultimate step"
consist of successive technical process
choices. Taken in that order, they correspond
to the economist's notion of a
long-run supply curve, indicating how the
cost of each additional unit of supply is a
rising step function of the cumulative supply
up to that point assuming a constant
state of the technology of extraction. These
steps need to be carried out only according
as the expectation of demand growth becomes
larger and firmer. Steps ii and v are
steps whose timing should depend on additional
factors besides the separation cost
sequence already mentioned.
The expectation of a much larger demand
well into the twenty-first century is documented,
in the report and in the Forum, by
a fascinating enumeration of anticipated
future technologies. Many of these are based
on or may utilize superconductivity, so far
attained best by cryogenic techniques for
which helium is the working fluid. The
superconductivity is in turn expected to be
applicable to a number of uses, such as
power transmission with low energy loss,
energy storage, and a number of applications
of strong magnetic fields. Among the
latter are several "technologies that either
do not now exist or are in early stages of
development" (pp. 13-18), such as magnetic
containment for nuclear fusion reactors.
Another possible application is magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) power generation

that converts some of the energy contained
in a high temperature gas stream from either
a coal-fired burner or a nuclear fission reactor
directly into electricity, instead of routing
all the energy through a conventional
steam cycle. The MHD development is
further along in the Soviet Union. There
also is a development furthest along in
West Germany and Japan-of magnetically
levitated low-noise high-speed trains.
It should be added that research is in
progress on the use of aluminum and possibly
other materials reaching low resistivity
at temperatures of 20-30?K, a range reachable
using liquid hydrogen as a coolant.
(See L. A. Hall, National Bureau of Standards
Report, and E. B. Forsyth et al.)
From the economic point of view, the
case for the helium storage program is not
convincingly made either in the report or
in the Forum. I have not found either cost
or benefit estimates for the program. Actually,
because of the importance of energy
supply processes among the increased uses
of helium listed above, the benefits cannot
be estimated without comparable cost and
fuel availability estimates for alternative
energy supply and use technologies which
have low or zero helium requirements. In
other words, to assess the helium storage
program, one also needs a long-run model
of the energy sector of the economy that
addresses the second decision problem of
Table 1. One will, of course, also need to
consider other important helium uses that
are not directly energy related.
Before turning to problem (2), I draw attention
to a few passages in the Helium Report
that will provide background for Sections
III and IV below, where I shall discuss
the choice of measures of value in which to
express benefits and costs. The report
(p. 23) contains an important piece of information
bearing on cost comparisons, to
the effect that the energy requirements for