earn at least as much as the incumbent, by
eliminating the unprofitable marginal unit.
This last attribute of contestable equilibria
-the fact that price must always at least
equal marginal cost-is important for the
economics of antitrust and regulation. For it
means that in a perfectly contestable market,
no cross subsidy is possible, that is, no
predatory pricing can be used as a weapon of
unfair competition. But we will see it also
has implications which are more profound
theoretically and which are more germarte to
our purposes. For it constitutes half of the
argument which shows that when there are
two or more suppliers of any product, its
price must, in equilibrium, be exactly equal
to marginal cost, and so resource allocation
must satisfy all the requirements of first best
optimality.

Indeed, the argument here is similar to the
one which has just been described. But there
is a complication which is what introduces
the two-firm requirement into this proposition.
p < MC constitutes an opportunity for
profit to an entrant who drops the unprofitable
marginal unit of output, as we have just
seen. It would seem, symmetrically, that p >
MC also automatically constitutes an opportunity
for profitable entry. Instead of selling
the y-unit output of a profitable incumbent,
the entrant can now offer to sell
the slightly larger output, y + e, using the
profits generated by the marginal unit at a
price greater than marginal cost to permit a
reduction in price below the incumbent's.
But on this side of the incumbent's output,
there is a catch in the argument. Suppose the
incumbent is a monopolist. Then output and
price are constrained by the elasticity of
demand. An attempt by an entrant to sell
y + e rather than y may conceivably cause a
sharp reduction in price which eliminates the
apparent profits of entry. In the extreme case
where demand is perfectly inelastic, there
will be no positive price at which the market
will absorb the quantity y +? . This means
that the profit opportunity represented by
p > MC can crumble into dust as soon as
anyone seeks to take advantage of it.
But all this changes when the market contains
two or more sellers. Now p > MC does
always constitute a real opportunity for profitable
entry. The entrant who wishes to sell a
bit more than some one of the profitable
incumbents, call him incumbent A, need not
press against the industry's total demand
curve for the product. Rather, he can undercut
A, steal away all of his customers, at least
temporarily, and, in addition, steal away e
units of demand from any other incumbent,
B. Thus, if A and B together sell Ya + Yb > Ya'
then an entrant can lure away Ya + -> Ya
customers, for - sufficiently small, and earn
on this the incremental profit e( p - MC)>O.
This means that the entrant who sells Ya + e
can afford to undercut the prevailing prices
somewhat and still make more profit than an
incumbent who sells Ya at price p.
In sum, where a product is sold by two or
more firms, any p > MC constitutes an irresistible
entry opportunity for hit-and-run entry
in a perfectly contestable market, for it
promises the entrant supernormal profits
even if they accrue for a very short period of
time.

Consequently, when a perfectly contestable
market contains two or more sellers,
neither p < MC nor p > MC is compatible
with equilibrium. Thus we have our third
and perhaps most crucial welfare attribute of
such perfectly contestable markets- their
prices, in equilibrium, must be equal to
marginal costs, as is required for Pareto optimality
of the "first best" variety. This, along
with the conclusion that such markets permit
no economic profits and no inefficiency in
long-run equilibrium, constitutes their critical
properties from the viewpoint of economic
welfare. Certainly, since they do enjoy
those three properties, the optimality of perfectly
contestable equilibria (with the reservations
already expressed about the case of
pure monopoly) fully justifies our conclusion
that perfect contestability constitutes a
proper generalization of the concept of perfect
competition so far as welfare implications
are concerned.

B. On the Determination of Industry
Structure

I shall be briefer and even less rigorous in
describing how industry structure is determined
endogenously by contestability