protection against an usually long life and
other risks of old age. For example, parents
who live longer than expected reduce bequests
to help finance consumption in the
additional years. If bequests are not a large
part of children's assets, bequests can give
elderly parents excellent protection against
various hazards, and yet changes in bequests
do not have much influence on children's
welfare. In effect, children help support their
parents in old age, although their support is
not fully voluntary.
The analysis is less simple when parents
do not leave bequests, perhaps because they
are not very altruistic or because they expect
their children to be better off than they are.
These families tend to underinvest in children
and underprotect parents against the hazards
of old age because bequests are not available
to finance investments and old-age support.
Social norms, feelings of guilt, and similar
mechanisms may greatly moderate the degree
of underinvestments and underprotection.
They can induce even selfish parents to
invest in children and selfish children to care
for sick or poor parents. Economists neglect
concepts like norms and guilt because no
one really knows how they evolve. Moreover,
sociologists (perhaps I should say "we" sociologists
since I am now officially also a sociologist)
are too prone to use norms as a
deus ex machina to explain behavior that is
difficult to explain in other ways. Nevertheless,
there can be little doubt that norms and
other intangible mechanisms do greatly affect
the relations between family members in
many societies, although presumably, they
do not work as well as bequests in linking
generations together.
Parents in richer countries have more resources
to spend on children and to protect
against the hazards of old age. Why then
have public expenditures on both the young
and old grown rapidly during the 100 years
as western countries as they have become
richer? One reason is that social norms are
weaker in the anonymous urban communities
of industrial countries where elderly
parents often live far from adult children. A
more analytically tractable reason is the high
rates of return in modern industrial societies
on investments in the health and training of
children. Recall my discussion of the role of
human capital in economic development.
Parents are eager to finance profitable investments
in children called for by economic
development, as long as they can draw on
gifts and bequests that they would give to
children. But gifts and bequests would become
nil in many families that invest a lot in
their children. These families would underinvest
in children, particularly when pressure
from norms is weak. The growth in public
support of schooling and other investments
in children as countries develop would then
appear to be mainly a response to the positive
effect of economic development on the
benefits from human capital.
Since families that do not leave bequests
are vulnerable to the hazards of old age, it is
not difficult to understand why public expenditures
on Social Security and medical
care for the elderly have also grown rapidly
in industrial countries. However, you may be
surprised to find out that public expenditures
on the old have not been at the expense
of the young. Since 1940 in the United States,
the ratio of expenditures per child under age
22 to expenditures per adult age 65 or over
has hardly changed. Our analysis that combines
investments in human capital with oldage
support does explain why expenditures
on the old and young grew in tandem. By
contrast, the popular view of generation
fighting-that public expenditures on the
elderly grew rapidly because the old became
politically powerful as they became more
numerous-cannot explain why expenditures
on children grew just as rapidly.
The overlapping-generation framework is
also a natural one to consider inequality and
the transmission of wealth and poverty across
generations. Families help perpetuate inequality
because children inherit abilities and
other "endowments" from parents. Moreover,
parents are the major source of the
assets and human capital of children. This
enormous influence of the family led my
esteemed teacher, Frank H. Knight, to claim
that ".where the family is the social unit, the
inheritance of wealth, culture, educational
advantages, and economic opportunities