virtually all decisions do, we are faced
with two very different framneworks of
judgment. The first of these is the economic
ethic of total cost-benefit analysis.
It is an ethic of being sensible, rational,
whatever we want to call it. It is an ethic
of calculation. We cannot indeed count
the cost without counting. Hence, it is an
ethic which depends on the development
of measurement and numbers, even if
these are ordinal numbers. This type of
decision-making, however, does not exhaust
the immense complexities of the
human organism, and we have to recognize
that there is in the world another
type of decision-making, in which the decision-
maker elects something, not because
of the effects that it will have, but
because of what he "is," that is, how he
perceives his own identity.
This "heroic" ethic takes three major
forms-the military, the religious, and the
sporting. The heroic ethic "theirs not to
reason why, theirs but to do and die" is so
fundamental to the operation of the military
that attempts to apply an economic
ethic to it in the form of cost-benefit analysis
or programmed budgeting, or even
strategic science as practiced by Herman
Kahn, T. C. Schelling, or even Robert
McNamara, are deeply threatening to the
morale and the legitimacy of the whole
military system. Religion, likewise, is an
essentially heroic enterprise, even though
there is a strong streak of spiritual costbenefit
analysis in it. The enormous role
which religion has played in the history of
mankind, for good or ill, is based on the
appeal which it has to the sense of identity
and the sense of the heroic even in ordinary
people. "Here I stand and I can do
no other" said Luther; "To give and not to
count the cost, to labor and ask for no reward"
is the prayer of St. Francis. "Do
your own thing" is the motto of our new
secular Franciscans, the Hippies. In our  national religion, President Kennedy said,
"Ask not what your country can do for
you, ask only what you can do for your
country." We find the same principle in
poetry, in art, in architecture, which are
constantly striving to disengage themselves
from the chilling embrace of costbenefit
analysis. I cannot resist quoting
here in full what has always seemed to me
one of the finest expressions in English
poetry of the heroic critique of economics
-Wordsworth's extraordinary sonnet on
King's College Chapel, Cambridge (Ecclesiastical
Sonnet, Number XLIII):
INSIDE OF KING'S COLLEGE CHAPEL,
CAMBRIDGE
Tax not the royal Saint with vain expense,
With ill-matched aims the Architect who
plannedAlbeit
labouring for a scanty band
Of white-robed Scholars only-this immense
And glorious Work of fine intelligence!
Give all thou canst; high Heaven rejects the
lore
Of nicely-calculated less or more;
So deemed the man who fashioned for the sense
These lofty pillars, spread that branching roof
Self-poised, and scooped into ten thousand
cells,
Where light and shade repose, where music
dwells
Lingering-and wandering on as loth to die;
Like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth
proof
That they were born for immortality.
Okay, boys, bring out your cost-benefit
analysis now! There is a story, for the
truth of which I will not vouch, that
Keynes once asked the chaplain of King's
College if he could borrow the chapel for
a few days. The chaplain was overjoyed
at this evidence of conversion of a noted
infidel until it turned out that Keynes had
got stuck with a load of wheat in the
course of his speculations in futures contracts