subsequent benefits. Many employees may simply
regard their Social Security payroll tax as
similar to the income tax, thereby increasing the
perceived marginal tax rate and raising the
deadweight loss of the tax.
Lack of transparency also permits programs
to have effects that might not be politically
acceptable if they were more explicit. For example,
some defenders of the current Social
Security system believe it permits a substantial
amount of redistribution that Congress would
not be willing to build into an investment-based
system of individual accounts. Although the
Social Security rules do not actually achieve
that redistribution, the important political principle
is that it is inappropriate in a democracy to
use a deliberately opaque system to achieve a
redistribution of income that would be rejected
if proposed in a more transparent way.
The Social Security program lacks transparency
because it is a defined benefit system
rather than a defined contribution plan of the
sort that now characterizes most private pensions.
Converting Social Security to a defined
contribution plan-even an unfunded "notional"
system such as Sweden and Italy now
have-would allow individuals to see the link
between their taxes and the resulting benefits.
An explicit decision by Congress to supplement
the contributions of low-income earners
in such a defined contribution plan would
achieve income redistribution without a loss
of transparency.
Recognizing Political Dynamics.-When we
economists talk about policy design, we generally
think about enacting permanent reforms.
But experience shows that legislated rules do
change and that the initial conditions influence
the path of that change. When designing a particular
program or advocating a particular design,
economists should recognize that some
designs are more stable than others and should
anticipate how a program might evolve.
The Medicare drug legislation enacted in
2003 is a good example. Medicare beneficiaries
will pay the first $250 a year in drug expenses,
followed by a 25-percent coinsurance rate to a
maximum benefit limit. Patients must then pay
100 percent of the drug cost up to $3600 in
out-of-pocket payments (in 2006). Above that,
Medicare will pay 95 percent of any additional
drug costs.  This rather strange design was accepted to
limit the total cost of the plan while delivering
benefits to a very large number of senior citizen
voters. An economically more rational plan
with the same budget cost would have insured at
least part of the range that is currently uninsured
and kept total costs down by a larger deductible.
But that would have had the political disadvantage
of giving benefits to fewer individuals. It
seems likely that future legislation will address
the residual insurance gap in a way that will
raise the total cost of the program.
There is another and potentially more significant
aspect of the future evolution of this Medicare
drug program. If all of the drugs consumed
by seniors come to be covered by government
insurance, there will be strong pressure to regulate
the price of those drugs. Such price regulation
is, in turn, likely to discourage the
development of drugs for those diseases that
particularly affect the elderly. It would be sadly
ironic if an insurance plan initiated to improve
drug access for seniors led ultimately to a reduced
availability of new drugs for this group.
B. Four Economic Principles
Let me turn now from these three political
principles-permitting individual choice, creating
program transparency, and recognizing political
dynamics-to four economic principles.
Recognizing the Economic Effects of Social
Insurance Programs and Their Taxes.-Noneconomists
who write about social insurance
programs often implicitly assume that social
insurance programs do not affect the behavior
of beneficiaries or the overall performance of
the economy. Evidence shows that the opposite
is true. Social insurance programs have important
and sometimes harmful effects on the
economy that are not fully recognized by the
public, Congress, or the politically responsible  officials.
A substantial volume of work during the past
quarter century has shown the various ways in
which social insurance programs do affect individual
behavior and the overall economy. These
effects include reducing national saving, inducing
early retirement, raising the unemployment
rate, pushing up the cost of health care, and
crowding out private health insurance. Any serious
evaluation of social insurance programs,