bills in 2006. About 72.5 percent of the Medicare
population meet this condition. For those
with lower bills, there is an annual pharmacy
bill threshold that rises with age from just below
$500 to close to $750. Individuals who are
prepared to self-insure and are currently below
this threshold will probably find delay desirable,
while those between this threshold and $802
will probably find immediate enrollment desirable.
Approximately 24.4 percent of the Medicare
population falls in the region where delay
is probably desirable, and 3.1 percent in the
region where immediate enrollment is probably,
but not definitely, desirable.
Table 8 classifies enrollment intentions
against the action that minimizes EPV of OPC.
The table shows that the choice of 70.6 percent
of the population minimizes EPV of OPC.
However, there are 10 percent who intend to
delay even though it is likely in their selfinterest
to enroll. On the other hand, 19.4 percent
of those intending to enroll would achieve
lower EPV of OPC by delaying. Of course,
some of that group may want the insurance
against catastrophic costs in the future, and
these could be rational decisions if there is very
strong aversion to the risk of large, low-probability
losses.
A final part of our survey asked subjects for
their preferences among the alternatives of no
prescription drug coverage, the Medicare Part D  standard plan, and three hypothetical alternative
plans:
* Guaranteed Benefit Plan: Medicare pays 52.3
percent of approved prescription drug costs,
no matter how high or low these costs are.
The annual premium of $444 is the same as
the standard plan.
* Major Cost Protection Plan: Pays all approved
prescription drug costs above $2,444
per year, but nothing until your cost at the
pharmacy reaches this level. The annual premium
of $444 is the same as the standard
plan.
* No Copay Plan: You pay an up-front annual
premium of $1,889 per year, and all approved
prescription drug costs are then fully covered,
with no copayments.
The alternative plans all have the same actuarial
value as the standard plan for the Medicare
population, but differ in the degree to which
they provide insurance against major pharmacy
costs. The Major Cost Protection Plan and No
Copay Plan provide almost complete insurance
against major costs, with the latter eliminating
the deductible and charging an up-front premium
for the actuarial value of this replacement.
The Guaranteed Benefit Plan is more
favorable than the Major Cost Protection Plan at
low pharmacy bills, but entails substantial risk
at high bills. These hypothetical alternatives
vary more from the standard plan than most
products currently being offered, but preferences
among them provides some indication of
preferences for features of actual plans.
Enrollee choice among the alternative plans
is not explained well by cost minimization; only
36.3 percent of enrollees choose the plan that
minimizes EPV of OPC. Further, consumers do
not seem to place much value on the insurance
component of the alternative plans-among enrollees,
the Guaranteed Benefit Plan that offers
relatively poor insurance against catastrophic
drug costs is the minimum cost alternative in
only 3.2 percent of cases, but is preferred by
27.1 percent, while the plans that offer almost
complete insurance are preferred by only 26
percent, even though they include the
minimum-cost alternative for 51.2 percent. We
conclude that consumers are likely to have