the economy-and at the cost of depriving
the executive branch of the luxury of blaming
the Federal Reserve when things go
wrong. The love-hate relation between the
Congress and Federal Reserve, however,
warrants more attention. Despite occasional
outbursts of anxiety over escalating interest
rates, Congress has shown little inclination
to control monetary policy, or even to inquire
into the consistency of monetary and
fiscal objectives. The Fed is required to report
monetary growth targets to the banking
committees, as though monetary policy were
a matter of banking system regulation, but
has little genuine interaction with the budget
committees whose job is to debate and propose
fiscal policy.

II. The Process under Stress
This whole complicated economic policy
system has been subjected to enormous strain
in recent years. Political economists like to
harken back to the golden years of the 1950's
and 1960's when economists got respect and
the economic policy machinery functioned
smoothly. The nostalgia is only partly a result
of faulty memories. It's not hard to
be satisfied with economists and policy
processes when the economy is growing, productivity
marches steadily upward, and even
the national debt is obligingly declining in
relative importance. It's much harder when
productivity growth plummets for reasons
that no one honestly purports fully to understand,
expectations of public and private
consumers have to be cut back to fit with
slower income growth, and inflation and interest
rates are bouncing around at unfamiliar
levels.

Adjusting to the energy shocks and slower
growth that began in the 1970's strained the
economic policy processes of all industrial
countries and made the participants feel
frustrated and inadequate. It's not obvious,
even with hindsight, that the fundamental
difficulties facing the industrial world in the
1970's can credibly be blamed on economists
or any particular structure of government
or economic policy responses, but all came
in for their share of the understandable
hostility.

The difficulties of the U.S. economy in the
1980's, by contrast, revolve heavily around
an economic policy mistake: the creation of
a large structural deficit in the federal budget.
I do not believe that the structure of our
economic decision process was the cause of
the mistake. Blaming the deficit on inherent
flaws in the policy process requires an explanation
of why the process did not cause
similar mistakes in the past. But the events
of 1981 which produced the deficit illustrate
several of the difficulties of economic policymaking
which make mistakes harder to
avoid:

the uncertainty of macroeconomic forecasting;


the isolation of monetary and fiscal
policy;

the contentiousness of economists and
their tendency to let their ideological positions
cloud their judgments about the
likely effects of particular policies.
That a tax cut unmatched by comparable
spending cuts would produce a deficit should
have surprised no economist. That the deficit
was so large reflected both economic and
political miscalculations. The Reagan Administration
has been faulted for masking
the deficit with a "rosy scenario," but the
fact is that most of the forecasting community,
including the Congressional Budget
Office, expected positive real growth in the
economy. The administration's official forecast
differed from the rest only in its degree
of optimism. Forecasters in and out of
government were oversanguine about growth
largely because they failed to realize how
serious the Federal Reserve was about reining
in the money supply to control inflation.
The Fed was not defying the administration,
which was touting the efficacy of monetary
stringency for controlling inflation, but hardly
anyone seemed to remember that the way
tight money controls inflation is by slowing
economic activity. Moreover, as our Association'
s President-elect, Robert Eisner, has
pointed out (1986, p. 146), the economics
community, unfamiliar with a world of high
inflation rates, overestimated the stimulative
effect of the existing deficit. Added to this
was the enthusiasm of the ideological proponents
of smaller government, some of whom