cost in foregone receipts on war-debt account,
might have resolved the war-debt-reparations-
commercial-debt tangle that proved so
destabilizing after the 1929 stock market
crash. I conclude that the existence of an
international lender of last resort made the
financial crises of 1825, 1836, 1847, 1866,
and 1907 more or less ephemeral, like summer
storms, whereas its absence in 1873, 1890,
and 1929 produced deep depressions-shortened
in the 1890 case by the deus ex machina
of gold production from the Rand. Again
there is room for disagreement.
The point of all this is that after about
1971, the United States, like Britain from
about 1890, has shrunk in economic might
relative to the world as a whole, and more
importantly, has lost the appetite for providing
international economic public goodsopen
markets in times of glut, supplies in
times of acute shortage, steady flows of
capital to developing countries, international
money, coordination of macroeconomic policy
and last-resort lending. The contraction
of concern from the world to the nation is
general, and applies to economists as well
as to politicians and the public. In reading
recent books on macroeconomic policy by
leading governmental economists under both
Democratic and Republican administrations,
the late Arthur Okun (1981) and Herbert
Stein (1984), I have been struck by how little
attention the authors paid to international
repercussions. The same observation has been
made by Ralph Bryant (1980, p. xviii) and
by the British economist R. C. 0. Matthews,
reviewing Arjo Klamer's Conversations with
Economists... (1985, p. 621). There has been
a recent upsurge of interest in the international
dimension because of the connections
among the federal deficit, the exchange rate
for the dollar, and the balance-of-payments
deficit, but the focus of this interest is almost
exclusively on what the connections mean
for U.S. interest rates, industrial policy,
growth, and wealth. The international impact
is largely ignored, bearing out the truth
in former German Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt's statement that "the United States
seems completely unconscious of the economic
efforts of its policies on the Alliance"
(1984, p. 27).

Some of the discussion of international
regimes by political scientists verges on what
my teacher, Wesley Clair Mitchell, used to
call "implicit theorizing," that is, convenient
ad hoc theoretical explanations to fit given
facts that lack generality. Charles Lipson
(1985), for example, suggested that the slippage
in U.S. hegemony in the 1970's resulted
in a loss of the international public good of
secure property rights and therefore in the
widespread nationalization of foreign direct
investment. He went on to say that the reason
less developed countries (LDCs) did not
default on their debts to bank syndicates was
that bank lending was "better institutionalized,
" "a smaller group," "better protected
by legal remedies" (pp. 136, 158, 170). He
was surprised that the decline of British
hegemony in the interwar period did not
result in more LDC aggression against foreign
property (p. 191), but failed to observe
the widespread default on foreign bonds in
the 1930's, despite the organization of international
finance. In my judgement Keohane
exaggerates the efficacy and importance of
the international regime in oil that was
formed after the first OPEC oil shock of
1973 (see his ch. 10). The crisis caused by the
Yom Kippur embargo of the Netherlands
was to my mind shockingly mishandled by
governments, and the public good of crisis
management was left to the private multinational
oil companies. The formation of the
International Energy Agency was a classic
operation in locking the barn door after the
horse had been stolen.

Between national self-interest and the provision
of international public goods, there is
an intermediate position: indifference to
both. An interesting contrast has been observed
in the 1930's between Britain which
forced Argentina into a bilateral payments
agreement (the Roca-Runciman Agreement
of 1933) in order to take advantage of its
monopsony position, and the United States
that had a similar opportunity vis-a-vis Brazil
but ignored it (Marcelo de Paiva Abreu,
1984).

It is fairly clear from the historical record
that economic hegemony runs down in decay
-in the British case after 1913 and the
United States about 1971-leading Felix