A. Acceptance of Natural Rate Theory
Most macroeconomists do not just view natural
rate theory as a useful null hypothesis.
They also see it as a description of reality. Such
a view is revealed in textbook presentations.
Economists accept natural theory for theoretical
and empirical reasons.
Theoretically, they view the assumptions of
natural rate theory as realistic. A standard criterion
for an economic model is that participants
in the economy care only about real outcomes.
That is the fundamental assumption of natural
rate theory. Also, unlike our other neutrality
results, natural rate theory is insensitive to deviations
due to "frictions," such as imperfect
information, taxes, myopia, or transaction costs.
As long as these "frictions" can be expressed
solely in real terms, the neutrality result of
natural rate theory will be robust.
Empirical considerations have also been influential
in economists' acceptance of natural
rate theory. The original Phillips curve showed
a close fit between the rate of change of nominal
wages and the inverse of the unemployment rate
for 97 years of British data, between 1861 and
1957. There was no inflation adjustment in this
equation. In the United States in the late 1960s
and early 1970s, however, such a simple inverse
relation between changes in nominal wages and
unemployment broke down, as both price and
wage inflation rose, along with the unemployment
rate. Natural rate theory offered an explanation
for this occurrence: it explained the rise
in inflation by the large oil supply shock and
also an increase in inflationary expectations,
both of which shifted the Phillips curve outward;
it explained the rise in unemployment by
a decline in demand.
Furthermore, new estimates of Phillips curves
seemed to show that the theory closely fit the data.
If inflationary expectations are formed as a simple
lag of past inflation, estimates of Phillips curves
should find that the coefficients on past inflation
sum to one. Many Phillips curve estimates fail to
reject that this sum is equal to one.66' 67 The stan-
dard errors of such estimates are quite large; thus,
they also fail to reject sums whose departure from
one is of sufficient size to result in departures of
economically significant magnitude from natural
rate theory. But the standard treatment of the Phillips
curve ignores this inconvenient fact.
The textbooks thus typically present natural
rate theory as a "just-so" story. It runs as follows.
The previous Keynesian economists had
posited a Phillips curve without a dependence
on inflationary expectations. Friedman (1968)
and Phelps (1968) perceived that such a theory
could not result from models where the participants
in the economy are concerned only with
real variables. They modified the relationship so
that wage and price equations would be affected
one for one by inflationary expectations. Such
judicious use of economic theory explained the
otherwise-mysterious finding of the simultaneous
increases in inflation and unemployment
of the late 1960s/early 1970s. The theory is also
consistent with most econometric estimates.
B. Nominal Considerations in Wage Behavior
We now turn to the same question regarding
wages that we asked concerning consumption
and investment. Is there "excess sensitivity"
relative to the respective neutrality? Natural
rate theory is based on the assumption that
wages and prices are set only with real considerations
in mind. "Excess sensitivity" here
66 See, for example, Robert J. Gordon (1977, table 3,
lines 6 and 7, 260).
67 Given the importance of such findings, it is remark-
able that their robustness to specifications of time period,
data, and exact specification of the Phillips curve has never
been subjected to tough tests-even though everything else
about the Phillips curve, including the natural rate of un-
employment itself, is considered to be estimated with great
imprecision. Akerlof, William T. Dickens, and George L.
Perry (2000) show a range of estimates for both wage and
price equations with many different specifications. These
estimates, particularly when made for periods of low infla-
tion, show considerable variation in the sum of the coefficients
on lagged inflation, dependent on the specification.
Another bit of evidence that suggests such estimates will be
sensitive to specification comes from the high standard
errors on the natural rate itself (Douglas Staiger, James H.
Stock, and Mark W. Watson 1997); it would be surprising
that the sum of lagged coefficients could be estimated
precisely if another component of the Phillips curve, the
natural rate, could be estimated only with very low preci-
sion. Gordon's own estimates show very different values for
this sum of coefficients. Of course, there is a theoretical
reason why estimates of such a sum should not be robust.
With rational expectations, rather than a simple mechanical
theory of formation of inflationary expectations, Sargent
(1971) shows that there is no theoretical reason that they
should sum to one.