the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in the
United States, Western Europe, and Japan.
The contradiction between the theory and
events explains why most economists during
the first half of this century showed little
interest in explaining long-term trends in
income and population. But the subject
is too important to remain neglected, and
Robert Solow, David Cass, and others developed
the neoclassical growth model in the
1950s and early 1960s. This model incorporates
two major advances over the Malthusian
model. Each person maximizes utility
that depends on present and future consumption.
More important is the recognition
that changes in the capital stock respond to
rates of return on investments. Unfortunately,
the neoclassical model also takes a
sizable step backward from Malthus by assuming
that fertility and other dimensions of
population growth are independent of wages,
incomes, and prices.
I trust that the basic properties of a simple
neoclassical model are familiar. What may
not be generally appreciated is that despite
the different assumptions, the analytic structures
of the neoclassical and Malthusian
models are quite close and many of their
implications are similar. If technology and
preferences do not change over time, both
models have stable steady-state levels of per
capita income. The neoclassical equilibrating
mechanism works through changes in the
rate of investment, while the Malthusian
mechanism works through changes in the
rate of population growth. To illustrate, if
the capital-labor ratio exceeds its steady-state
level, the rate of return on capital is below
and the wage rate is above their steady-state
levels. In the neoclassical model this discourages
investment, which lowers the capitallabor
ratio over time (with exogenous population
growth). In the Malthusian model this
encourages population growth, which also
lowers the capital-labor ratio over time (with
exogenous investment in capital). We have
seen that a shock to population in the
Malthusian model has no effect on the level
of population or per capita income in the
long run. Similarly, in the neoclassical model
a shock to the capital stock (perhaps wartime
destruction of capital) has no long-run effect
on the aggregate capital stock or per capita
income.
The persistent growth in per capita incomes
during the past two centuries is no
easier to explain within the neoclassical
framework than within the Malthusian. Of
course, the neoclassical model postulates exogenous
technological progress to "explain"
continuing growth in per capita incomes, but
the need to rely on "exogenous" progress is
a confession of failure to explain growth
within the model. Moreover, the Malthusian
model can equally well postulate exogenous
progress to "explain" persistent growth.
II. The Family and Economic Growth
After a short while the economics profession
became disenchanted with the neoclassical
model, presumably because it too did
not help in understanding progress. The excitement
reflected in hundreds of papers that
extended and elaborated this model in the
1950s and 1960s gave way during the past
fifteen years to a lack of interest in the
analytics of growth that is a little reminiscent
of the situation during the first half
of the century.
Fortunately, a more relevant growth model
is available through combining the best features
of the neoclassical and MIalthusian
models and by adding a focus on investment
in knowledge and skills. The neoclassicists
are right to emphasize endogenous capital
accumulation and utility maximization.
Malthusians are right to stress the response
of fertility and other components of population
growth to changes in the economy, and
that these responses can greatly influence
economic change.
I will sketch out a modified neoclassical
model where parents choose both the number
of children and the capital (human or
physical) bequeathed to each child. Parental
altruism or "love" toward children provides
a powerful framework for the analysis of
both the quantity and so-called quality of
children. Altruism means that the utility of
parents depends on the utility of each child.
The assumption of altruism is realistic for
the vast majority of families, although
parent-child interactions are determined also