a gap between their conception of how they
should behave and riding the merry-go-round.
However much they may enjoy it, they also feel
the need to distance themselves from an activity
that is so age inappropriate. They manifest this
distance by riding a frog, rather than a "serious"
animal like a horse; alternatively they show off
by standing up "dangerously" during the ride. In
some way or other they play the clown.
Behavior at the merry-go-round is, of course,
just the stuff of kids. But Goffman supplements
it with a totally serious example. In surgical
operations, because of their inexperience, medical
students are given tasks that are ridiculously
easy.17 They respond in the same way as the
older children at the merry-go-round: they also  act the clown.18
In economics, as elsewhere, $500 bills do not
just lie on the street. If living up to norms is
such an important motivation, it must show up
in many economic examples, even if it is not
identified in exactly our language. Gary S.
Becker's Economics of Discrimination (1957)
offers an example of now-standard economics  that can also be interpreted in terms of such
norms. Becker's theoretical innovation was to
modify plain-vanilla economic utility by the
introduction of a discrimination coefficient. He
defined that as the loss in utility incurred by
exchange with someone from a different racefor
example, the loss of a white from an exchange
with a black. The natural interpretation
is that the discrimination coefficient represents
the loss in utility for the white from physically
engaging in an exchange with a black. But this
representation of the utility function can also be
interpreted in terms of norms. There is a code as
to how blacks and whites should behave toward
each other. The white has a view that she should
not deal with a black. She loses utility equal to
the value of the discrimination coefficient-not
from the physical association-but ipso facto
from the violation of the code. There is reason
to believe that such norm-based interpretation
better reflects the nature of discrimination than
a physical exchange-based theory. In the preCivil
Rights period, when Becker was writing,
there can be no doubt that discrimination, and
the code that upheld it, was stronger in the
South than in the North. Yet exchanges between
blacks and whites were surely much more com-  mon in the South than in the North. At least one
statistic reflects such a difference: there were
significantly lower levels of residential segregation
by race in the South than in the North.
B. Summary
Our examples are illustrative of behavior that
is pervasive. Sociology is dense in examples of
people's views as to how they and others should
behave, their joy when they live up to those
standards, and their discomfort and reactions
when they fail to do so.
We now turn to examining the role of
norms in each of the five macroeconomic neutralities.
20 In each case we shall ask whether  17 Goffman (1961) observed the behavior of such students
in medical operations.  18 Another example, the Milgram experiment (Stanley
Milgram 1963, 1965) demonstrates the strength of such  motivation-by showing the lengths that people will take to  do what they think they should be doing. To see this  interpretation of this experiment, which is only one of many  ways of viewing it, it is useful to give a brief description. On  arrival, subjects were told that they were involved in a  learning experiment. They were put in the role of the  "teacher," who should administer shocks to a "learner"
whenever he gave a wrong answer. The subjects are led to  identify with their role as teacher in this experiment, and  feel that they should obey the experimenter. Rather than  being another subject, and, rather than being wired, as it  appeared, actually the learner was an unwired, trained con-  federate of the experimenter. Subjects were then instructed  to administer shocks of escalating voltage as the learner  made errors. A surprising fraction of subjects escalated their  shocks to the maximum 450 volts-even though such a
dosage in real life would have been lethal. There are many  different versions of the experiment, but the version where  the confederate grunts and moans at 75 volts, asks to be let  out of the experiment at 150 volts, and refuses to give any  more answers at 300 volts, is typical. Here more than 60
percent of subjects went all the way. Nor is such motivation  limited to the laboratory. The rampage of the Nazi Reserve  Police Battalion #101 in Poland during World War II  (Christopher R. Browning 1999) gives a real-world mirror  of the behavior Milgram obtained in the laboratory. Like  Milgram's subjects, the members of this unit, were just  Ordinary Men (Browning's title). They were recruited from  the most prosaic civilian occupations.  19 See Douglas S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton (1993,  table 3.1, 64).
20 Some years ago, at a conference in Spoleto, Italy,  Edmund Phelps gave a still-unpublished lecture wondering  why the economics of the twentieth century had failed to  discover what was central to most of the arts, which was the
role of subjectivity. This paper is about the direct relevance  of such subjectivity for macroeconomics. I have very much  benefitted from enjoyable conversations with Professor