the movement toward inequality must have
been even greater than the tax data show
because they do not include the large
amounts of income taxpayers were able to
shelter before the enactment of the Tax Reform
Act of 1986.
Many economists and statisticians have
examined these trends, but nobody has been
able to explain them fully. The declining
share of incomes received by the lower income
classes has been attributed to the increase
in the number of single-parent families,
slow growth in earnings of production
workers, the disappearance of middleincome
jobs, and other factors.8 But these
explanations do not account for the recent
explosion of earned and property incomes of
those in the top tail of the distribution.
The trend toward greater inequality has
developed despite the existence of an income
tax in the United States for seventy-six years
and of an estate tax for eighty years. Clearly,
the tax system never reduced inequality very
much and other forces in the 1980s have
swamped whatever equalizing effect it may
have had earlier. I turn now to an examination
of the burdens imposed by the tax system
and how they have affected the distribution
of income after tax.
Distribution of Tax Burdens. I have been
estimating federal, state, and local tax burdens
by income classes for the last two
decades on the basis of the Bookings
MERGE files.9 These files are based on the
CPS surveys, modified at the top by the
incomes reported on federal individual income
tax returns. As shown in Table 3, the
tax burdens of the bottom 90 percent of the
income distribution did not change very
much from 1966 to 1985. By contrast, the
tax burdens of the top ten percent of income
recipients fell, especially those of the top 5
percent and 1 percent. Effective tax rates of
the top 5 percent dropped by one-fifth between
1966 and 1985 (from 32.7 percent to
26.0 percent); for the top 1 percent, the
reduction was more than one-third (from
39.6 percent to 25.3 percent).
Tax burdens of the highest income recipients
fell because top federal individual tax
rates were reduced throughout this period,
from 70 percent in 1966 to 50 percent in
1985. Furthermore, the federal corporation
income tax dwindled to relative obscurity,
falling from 4.1 percent of GNP in 1966 to
1.6 percent in 1985. The proliferation of
personal deductions (for example, state and
local taxes, interest payments, and IRAs),
tax-exempt bonds, and tax shelters were also
major factors in the reduction of the tax
burdens in the top part of the income distribution.
The reduction in the corporate tax