costs. Given the inertia of inflation,
once it becomes embodied in wage rates and
industrial costs; given the fortuitous response
of the oil-producing countries when
awakened by the international inflation; and
given the perhaps appropriate, but surely
delayed, responses to inflation by monetary
and fiscal policymakers in many of the industrial
countries, it is possible to understand
why the 1970's turned out to be such a
disappointing- even a disastrous- decade.
And commodity price speculation played
more than a small part in that disaster.
III. Rational "Price Bubbles"
The fact that rational expectations may
not preclude the existence for considerable
periods of speculative, self-maintaining price
movements toward zero or infinity has recently
been recognized in a rapidly expanding
theoretical literature of working papers
and a few published articles.7 Indeed, we are
seeing a "bubble" of papers on "rational
price bubbles." Whether rational expectations
are or are not consistent with price
bubbles, however, seems to depend entirely
on what definition one gives to the "rationality"
of rational expectations. One may define
as rational any expectation that, if generally
acted upon, will turn out to be essentially
self-confirming. In that case, price bubbles
generated by the simplest of extrapolative
price expectations may be consistent with
rational behavior. On the other hand, one
may alternatively define as rational only
those expectations that fully incorporate an
understanding of " long-run" "market fundamentals"
: namely, the assumption by each
agent of rationally maximizing behavior by
each other agent, each responding to observed
changes in prices and quantities as
would occur in a market model of "long-run
equilibrium," although observed through a
screen of random, nonserially correlated,
short-run disturbances. Actions based on
such expectations thus tend to confirm the
expectations; and each confirmation reinforces
further reliance up on the long-term
equilibrium model. There seems little room
for price bubbles in that version of rational
expectations.
But whether, and to what extent, market
fundamentals will, in fact, prevail, surely depends,
as I have argued above, on the durability
of the commodity, its storage costs,
and particularly on the degree to which, and
the speed with which, its production and
consumption are affected by expected price.
Given the world as it is, I suggest that the
"fundamentals" do not always and everywhere
prevail. Bubbles do occur, and are
important.
However, most or all of the new literature
on price bubbles appears to deal only with
price movements away from, or back towards,
the equilibrium price that reflects
long-run market fundamentals. It thus implies
that, when prices are, for any period,
approximately stable, they must therefore
be at or close to an equilibrium dictated
by market fundamentals-reflecting, at that
price, an approximate balance between the
expected supply from new production and
the expected demand for final consumption.
Price bubbles, in contrast, involve an extrapolation
of expected price movements (however
originating), causing further movement
in the same direction.
In my view, however, where the impacts of
price on amounts produced and consumed
are small, slow, and uncertain, a speculative
price-(i.e., a nonequilibrium price) is not
always or necessarily a moving price. The
price may rest for a considerable period of
time at-or fluctuate narrowly around-a
level far above (or below) any equilibrium
determined by market fundamentals. This
situation might represent either the extrapolation
of an originally accidental stability, or
a standoff between expectations of further
rise by some participants and the expectation
of fall by others.8