focal point for bringing the advice of the
economics profession into the service of
presidential decision making and a locus
for creating an official forecast of economic
activity.
The creation of OMB and CEA improved
the president's ability to formulate and
articulate macroeconomic policy. It also left
the president, in addition to his other impossible
duties, with the job of resolving a builtin
tension over responsibility for economic
policy among the CEA, OMB, and the
Treasury, not to mention the White House
staff and the agencies with line responsibility
for implementing various aspects of economic
poclcy.
Presidents have tried various coordination
mechanisms including "troika" arrangements
and an almost infinite variety of
broader councils and committees with varying
membership, responsibilities, and leadership.
The system works tolerably well or
exceedingly creakily, depending on the president'
s personal style and the personalities
involved. But it encourages battling over turf
as well as substance, and is hardly designed
to minimize the amount of presidential energy
needed to evolve a coherent, explainable
policy on taxing and spending. One
might wonder whether it is not time to do
what so many other countries do and give
our president the equivalent of a responsible
finance minister charged with the functions
now diffused to our budget director, Council
of Economic Advisers, and Treasury Secretary.

The fragmentation of power and responsibility
is, of course, even more extreme in the
Congress. The legislative branch also has a
long history of attempts to make taxing and
spending policy in a more coherent fashion
by adding new coordinating institutionsappropriations
committees, a joint economic
committee, budget committees, a congressional
budget office-without eliminating or
consolidating any of the old ones.
The most recent attempt to improve congressional
economic decision making-one
in which I was an active participant-followed
the Budget Reform Act of 1974 which
created the budget committees and the Congressional
Budget Office. These budget reforms
succeeded in their main objective of
focusing the attention of the Congress on
overall budget policy, not just individual taxing
and spending fragments. They have
forced the Congress to fit the pieces together,
to debate and vote on an overall taxing
and spending plan-a budget resolution-to
which specific taxing and spending matters
must conform. No one can say that the
Congress in the last few years has ignored
fiscal policy! The creation of the Congressional
Budget Office, moreover, has given
Congress independent access to forecasts,
projections, and analysis of economic options.

The downside of the budget reforms, however,
was that the budget process was superimposed
on the already complex responsibilities
of authorizing, appropriating, and tax
committees. It has added to the layers and
stages of congressional policymaking without
removing any of them, has made the process
of budget decision making nearly impossible
even for members of Congress to understand,
and increased the workload so much that
decisions are routinely made late and in an
atmosphere of crisis. Moreover, Congress
now frequently has to deal with two sets of
estimates, those of the OMB and those of
the Congressional Budget Office, which may
differ because they are based on different
forecasts of economic activity, or for even
less obvious technical reasons.
Meanwhile, back in the separate world of
the Federal Reserve, monetary policy is being
decided and carried out. It is a curious
paradox that a nation, which feels it needs
many more hands on the tiller of fiscal policy
than most countries regard as workable, is
content to leave monetary policy to a central
bank with fewer visible ties to the rest of the
government than the central banks of most
countries.
There is plenty of informal communication,
of course, especially between the
Federal Reserve and the hydraheaded economic
establishment of the executive branch.
More formal cooperation between the monetary
and fiscal authorities, as in the United
Kingdom, might contribute only marginally
to making monetary and fiscal policy decisions
part of a more coherent strategy for