count the once and for all costs of move-
ment. These calculations are like those of
the planner, but witlh an important differ-
ence. An individual does not initernalize
all the considerations the planner takes
into account. The external effects are the
familiar ones of congestion theory. A
worker decidling to join a queue or to stay
in one consi(lers the probabilities of getting
a job, but not the effects of his decision on
the probabilities that others face. He
lowers those probabilities for people in
the queue he joins and raises them for per-
sons waiting for the kind of job he vacates
or turns (lown. tI0oo many persons are
unemployed waiting for good jobs, while
less desirable ones go begging. How-
ever, externial effects also occur in the
(lecisions of employers whether to fill a
vacancy with the applicant at hand or to
wait for someone more qualified. It is not
obvious, at least to me, whether the mar-
ket is biased toward excessive or inadle-
quate search. But it is doubtful that it
produces the optimal amounit.
Empirically the proposition that in the
United States the zero-inflation rate of
unemployment reflects voluntary and effi-
cienit job-seeking activity strains credulity.
If there were a natural rate of unemploy-
ment in the United States, what would it
be? It is hard to say because virtually all
econometric Phillips curves allow for a
whole menu of steady inflation rates. But
estimates constrained to produce a vertical
long-run Phillips curve suggest a natural
rate between 5 and 6 percent of the labor
force.3
So let us consider some of the features of
an overall unemployment rate of 5 to 6 per-
cent. First, about 40 percent of accessions
in manufacturing are rehires rather than
new hires. Temporarily laid off by their
employers, these workers had been await-
ing recall and were scarcely engaged in
voluntary search activity. Their unem-
ployment is as much a deadweight loss as
the disguised unemployment of redundant
workers oni payrolls. This number declines
to 25-30 percent when unemployment is
4 percent or below. Likewise, a 5-6 perceint
unemployment rate means that voluntary
quits amount only to about a third of
separations, layoffs to two-thir(-ds. The pro-
portions are rever-sed at low unemploy-
ment rates.
Second, the unemployment statistic is
not an exhaustive count of those with time
and inceintive to search. An additional
3 percent of the labor force are involun-
tarily confinedI to part-time work, atid an-
other 3 4 of t percent are out of the labor
force because they "could not find job" or
"think no work available"---discouraged
by market con(litions rather than personal
incapacities.
Third, with unemployment of 5-6 per-
cent the number of reported vacancies is
less than 1/ 2 of 1 percent. Vacancies ap-
pear to be understated relative to unem-
ployment, but they rise to l2 percent when
the unemployment rate is below 4 per-
cent. At 5-6 percent unemployment, the
economy is clearly capable of generating
many more jobs with marginal produc-
tivity high enough so that people prefer
them to leisure. TI he capital stock is Ino
limitation, siince 5-6 percent unemploy-
ment has beeni associated with more than
20 percent excess capacity. Mioreover,
when more jobs are createdI by expansion
of demand, with or without inflation, labor
force participation increases; this would
hardly occur if the aclditional jobs were low
in quality and productivity. As the parable
of the central employment plannier indi-
cates, there will be excessive waiting for
jobs if the roster of jobs an(d the meniu of
vacancies are suboptimal.
In summary, labor markets charac-
terized by 5-6 percent unemployment do
not display the symptoms one would ex-