tape into the computer. Such
options are exercised rarely and when they
are, usually in a casual way.
The same well-known sets of figures are
used again and again in all possible combinations
to pit different theoretical models
against each other in formal statistical
combat. For obvious reasons a decision is
reached in most cases not by a knock-out,
but by a few points. The orderly and
systematic nature of the entire procedure
generates a feeling of comfortable selfsufficiency.

This complacent feeling, as I said before,
discourages venturesome attempts to
widen and to deepen the empirical foundations
of economic analysis, particularly
those attempts that would involve crossing
the conventional lines separating ours from
the adjoining fields.
True advance can be achieved only
through an iterative process in which improved
theoretical formulation raises new
empirical questions and the answers to
these questions, in their turn, lead to new
theoretical insights. The "givens" of today
become the "unknowns" that will have to
be explained tomorrow. This, incidentally,
makes untenable the admittedly
convenient methodological position according
to which a theorist does not need
to verify directly the factual assumptions
on which he chooses to base his deductive
arguments, provided 'his empirical conclusions
seem to be correct. The prevalence
of such a point of view is, to a large extent,
responsible for the state of splendid
isolation in which our discipline nowadays
finds itself.
An exceptional example of a healthy
balance between theoretical and empirical
analysis and of the readiness of professional
economists to cooperate with experts in
the neighboring disciplines is offered by
Agricultural Economics as it developed in
this country over the last fifty years. A
unique combination of social and political
forces has secured for this area unusually
strong organizational and generous financial
support. Official agricultural statistics
are more complete, reliable, and systematic
than those pertaining to any other major
sector of our economy. Close collaboration
with agronomists provides agricultural
economists with direct access to information
of a technological kind. When they
speak of crop rotation, fertilizers, or alternative
harvesting techniques, they usually
know, sometimes from personal experience,
what they are talking about. Preoccupation
with the standard of living of the rural
population has led agricultural economists
into collaboration with home economists
and sociologists, that is, with social scientists
of the "softer" kind. While centering
their interest on only one part of the economic
system, agricultural economists
demonstrated the effectiveness of a systematic
combination of theoretical approach
with detailed factual analysis. They
also were the first among economists to
make use of the advanced methods of
mathematical statistics. However, in their
hands, statistical infereince became a
complement to, not a substitute for,
empirical research.
The shift from casual empiricism that
dominates much of today's econometric
work to systematic large-scale factual
analysis will not be easy. To start with, it
will require a sharp increase in the annual
appropriation for Federal Statistical Agencies.
The quality of government statistics
has, of course, been steadily improving.
The coverage, however, does not keep up
with the growing complexity of our social
and economic system and our capability
of handling larger and larger data flows.
The spectacular advances in computer
technology increased the economists' potential
ability to make effective analytical
use of large sets of detailed data. The time