DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
B. Labor Incentives
The implicitly uniform-price annuitization in
Social Security also affects labor market incentives.
The use of uniform annuity pricing (overall
or within still heterogeneous risk classes)
violates the conditions for first-best optimization.
Compared to first-best pricing, the decision
that would be distorted is that of labor
supply. If annuity pricing is breakeven, then
some are being taxed on work while others are
being subsidized compared to a system where
annuities are priced for individual life expectancies.
An alternative counterfactual would be
a failure to annuitize at all. Without annuitization,
we would have more accurate labor market
incentives person-by-person, but earnings would
finance less satisfactory consumption trajectories.
We would fail to insure not only life expectancy
realizations but also changes in life
expectancy as information accrues. That is,
even unfair annuities can raise individual welfare
if the alternative is no annuities.
I conclude that having a mandated retirement
income program provide its benefits as annuities
is sensible.
III. Workers and Families: Young Child,
Spouse, and Survivor Benefits
Social Security provides more than just retirement
benefits for workers. It provides benefits
for disabled workers and their families, for
young children of a deceased worker, and for
elderly spouses and surviving spouses. In addition,
a divorced spouse may be eligible for the
same benefits as a spouse if the marriage lasted
at least ten years.31 Benefits other than worker
benefits are referred to as auxiliary benefits.
These benefits are subject to a maximum
rule-a beneficiary receives the largest benefit
he or she is eligible for-with no increment for
also being eligible for a smaller benefit. That is,
if someone has worked at least ten years, on
retirement he or she is eligible for a retired
worker benefit. He or she is also eligible for a
spouse benefit if married to a retired worker
beneficiary. But the total amount of benefit is
equal to the maximum of the two benefits. Sim-
31 There is a family maximum that proportionally re-  duces all benefits except those of the worker if it binds.  ilarly, someone eligible for a worker benefit and
also eligible for a survivor benefit receives only
the larger benefit.32 A central design feature is
that these auxiliary benefits are not paid for on
an individual basis-workers with the same
earnings history receive the same retired worker
benefits whether or not they have family members
or ex-spouses collecting auxiliary benefits.
Auxiliary benefits raise four questions. Does
it make sense to mandate benefits for family
members and ex-spouses? Does it make sense to
base benefits on a maximum rule? Does it make
sense to finance all of the auxiliary benefits
from the program as a whole rather than in part  or in full from the benefits of the retired worker?
Are the details of benefit determination rules as
well-designed as might be?
Let me start with the first, most basic question.
It makes sense to provide auxiliary benefits
since studies suggest that significant numbers of
workers do not insure their lives adequately and
would not make good choices between singleand
joint-life annuities. More generally we are
learning more about the ways in which the
allocation of resources within the family does
not conform to a single maximization with a
single budget constraint. Since the government
cares about the different family members (and
not just the worker), direct allocations to family
members matter since they will change the allocation
of resources within the family. Protecting
family members is a role governments have
recognized for centuries.
The other questions are more complex and
need more detailed analyses. Two issues are
central here. These are the positive and normative
issues of how consumption is actually allocated
within families and how to combine
evaluations and rules that affect both individuals
and families. Research on the determination
of allocations within the family is still in an
early stage of development. And normative
analysis has not progressed much beyond identification
of the dilemma in recognizing both
32 If the spouse or survivor benefit is larger, the person is  referred to as having dual eligibility. In 2002, 38 percent of  elderly women received only a worker benefit, 34 percent  received only an auxiliary benefit and 28 percent were  "dually entitled." These fractions are expected to change as
more and more women with substantial careers reach retirement
age.
VOL. 94 NO. 1
9