can be done in the face of outcries that this
would be jeopardizing the financial soundness
of the social-security system.
Outlays on actual programs, on the other
hand, are somewhat harder to start and
stop rapidly. There is also the need not to
get too far ahead of the effective operation
of whatever anti-inflation program is put in
place, whether the program of gross markup
warrants proposed above or some other, lest
anticipatory speculation and inflation get
out of hand. The exact program for the
start-up period will require careful study.
What happens after the first few months
will depend to a large extent on what Keynes
called the "animal spirits" of the financial
community. At one extreme there could be
such horror and alarm at the violation of
the conventional wisdom concerning the
sinfulness of deficits as to produce a
widespread hibernation and flight to foreign
shores. More likely, once the financial community
has become convinced of the seriousness
of the administration's purpose to
bring about full employment, and once it is
anticipated that demand will shortly use up
the spare capacity of existing productive
facilities, private capital formation may pick
up to the point of absorbing and recycling
individual savings sufficiently so that government
recycling may for the time being
become unnecessary. At the same time, government
revenues from increased GNP will
increase and outlays for unemployment insurance
and welfare will decrease. Also,
there may be a need to shut down those
governmental programs that compete for
real resources with private capital formation,
in order to avoid a real "crowding out"
(as contrasted with the financial crowding
out alleged to occur as a result of government
borrowing associated with a tax cut).
As a result, a brief period of budget balance
or even of surplus may become appropriate.
As the economy hits the ceiling of full
employment, however, still another transition
becomes necessary. For a while capital
formation may continue on its momentum,
recycling savings but producing excess capacity
that either cannot find labor with
which to operate or cannot find markets in
which to sell its product. Within a short
time after hitting the full-employment ceiling,
capital formation will have to drop from
that appropriate to a 10-percent growth rate
to that suited to a far slower growth rate. At
this point attempted savings may again exceed
what can be absorbed by private capital
formation, even at very low rates of
interest. Other ways to recycle the excess
will again become necessary, one of which
will be renewed government recycling.
XIII. Long-Term Excess of Demand Saving
over Private Investment

There is, indeed, no principle of economics
that says that there will always be a
feasible rate of interest that will equate
desired savings and private capital-formation
under conditions of steady full employment.
Current trends seem to be such as to
make such a possibility unlikely. One factor
has been a spate of capital-saving innovations
and practices. Fiber optics, when fully
utilized, costs less per unit of service than
previous technologies by orders of magnitude,
leaving ductways planned for copper
conductors forever surplus; electronic exchanges
occupy a fraction of the space
formerly required by equivalent electromechanical
exchanges; just-in-time practices
reduce investment in inventory; improved
communications enable more freight to be
carried on a single track line with sidings
than was formerly carried by a full two-track
line; a man assembling electronic gear with
a soldering iron uses far less capital than
the man in the pulpit of a rolling mill, and
service industries generally use less capital
per employee than manufacturing, mining,
or transportation.

Moreover, before gross investment can
begin to recycle private savings, it must first
recycle funds set aside in depreciation,
amortization, depletion, and obsolescence
charges, while rapid obsolescence due to
accelerating technological progress makes
capital formation relatively insensitive to
changes in interest rates. Very low or negative
interest rates may stimulate investment
in nondepreciating assets such as land, but