constantly changing. Thus, if cigarette smok-
ing were found to be determined primarily by
genetic factors, the answers to question 17
would probably change even in the absence of
any change in values.
Positive economic questions are also em-
bedded in the insurance company underwriting
issues. Most economists realize that requiring
health insurance companies to charge healthy
people the same premium as those with a ge-
netic disease will deter healthy individuals
from purchasing insurance. But economists
may well differ as to how large that effect will
be and how large a welfare loss it implies.
It is easy to see that there are positive ques-
tions embedded in the policy-value questions,
but it is more difficult to believe that disagree-
ment over them, rather than differences in
values, explains the low level of consensus
among health economists with respect to the
policy-value questions. Note that the physi-
cians have a higher level of consensus about
the policy-value questions than do the health
economists. This probably reflects more ho-
mogeneous values among physicians rather
than agreement about the embedded positive
questions. (Note the low level of agreement
among physicians on the explicit positive
questions.)
It may be that it is not so much disagreement
among health economists about the embedded
positive questions as it is uncertainty about
them that make differences in values the
driving force in replies to the policy-value
questions. Many psychologists and economists
have observed that uncertainty about a datum
causes most individuals to give it less weight
when making choices.:
Uncertainty among health economists con-
cerning the positive questions that are embed-
ded in the policy-value questions is suggested
by their use of the "no opinion" option. Un-
like the theorists, who chose "no opinion"
twice as often for the positive questions as for
the policy-value questions (28 percent versus
15 percent), the health economists chose "no
opinion" less often for the positive questions
than for the policy-value questions (8 percent
versus 11 percent).36 The role of uncertainty
was mentioned by Milton Friedman in 1966 as
a reason for qualifying his position about the
relative imeportance of scientific judgment and
value differences (Friedman, 1966 p. 6).
In order to investigate further the relation-
ship between policy-value and positive ques-
tions, I developed two indexes based on the
answers to the national health insurance and
insurance underwriting questions. The first in-
dex measures each respondent's support for
national health insurance. It is constructed by
assigning a value of 1 to agreement with each
of questions 3, 7, 14, and 15, a value of 0 for
disagreement with those questions, and a value
of 0.5 for no opinion. The sum of the values
was divided by 4, giving a range for the index
of 1 (indicating agreement with all four ques-
tions) to 0 (indicating disagreement with all
four questions). The "actuarial" 37 model in-
dex was based on answers to questions 8, 17,
and 20. In the case of question 8, "disagree"
was given a value of 1, and for questions 17
and 20 "agree" was given a value of 1. The
total score for each individual is divided by 3,
again yielding a range for the index from 1 to
0 (indicating complete support or complete re-
jection of the actuarial approach).
The results are presented in Table 3. We
see that with respect to national health insurance
the support among the three groups is virtually
identical. There is considerable variation around
the mean for each group, and the amount of vari-
ation is similar across thOe groups. Thirteen per-
cent of all respondents had an index value of 1,
while 15 percent completely rejected the notion
of national health insurance with an index value
of 0. Not surprisingly, there is a negative cor-
relation between the national health insurance
index and the actuarial model index. But there