ment can only be temporary, as expectations
must soon catch up with the facts, at least in the
absence of new shocks. The very same mechanism
works in the case of an increase in demand,
so that the responsiveness of wages and
prices is the same on either side of the natural
rate.
The upshot is that Friedman's model also
implies a Phillips-type relation between inflation,
employment or unemployment, and past
inflation,-provided the latter variable is interpreted
as a reasonable proxy for expected inflation.
But it turns the standard explanation on its
head: instead of (excess) employment causing
inflation, it is (the unexpected component of)
the rate of inflation that causes excess
employment.
One very basic implication of Friedman's
model is that the coefficient of price expectations
should be precisely unity. This specification
implies that whatever the shape of the short-run
Phillips curve a shape determined by the relation
between expected and actual price changes,
and by the elasticity of labor supply with respect
to the perceived real wage the long-run curve
must be vertical.
Friedman's novel twist provided a fresh prop
for the claim that stabilization policies are not
really needed, for, with wages flexible, except
possibly for transient distortions, the Hicksian
mechanism receives powerful reinforcement
from changes in the real money supply. Similarly,
the fact that full employment was a razor
edge provided new support for the claim that
stabilization policies were bound to prove destabilizing.

C. The Macro Rational Expectations Revolution
But the death blow to the already badly battered
Keynesian position was to come only
shortly thereafter by incorporating into Friedman'
s model the so-called rational expectation
hypothesis, or REH. Put very roughly, this hypothesis,
originally due to John Muth, states that
rational economic agents will endeavor to form
expectations of relevant future variables by
making the most efficient use of all information
provided by past history. It is a fundamental and
fruitful contribution that has already found many
important applications, for example, in connection
with speculative markets, and as a basis for
some thoughtful criticism by Robert Lucas
( 1976) of certain features of econometric models.
What I am concerned with here is only its
application to macro-economics, or MREH,
associated with such authors as Lucas (1972),
Thomas Sargent (1976), and Sargent and Neil
Wallace (1976).
The basic ingredient of MREH is the postulate
that the workers of Friedman's model hold rational
expectations, which turns out to have a number
of remarkable implications: (i) errors of
price expectations, which are the only source of
departure from the natural state, cannot be
avoided but they can only be short-lived and
random. In particular, there cannot be persistent
unemployment above the natural rate for this
would imply high serial correlation between the
successive errors of expectation, which is inconsistent
with rational expectations; (ii) any attempts
to stabilize the economy by means of
stated monetary or fiscal rules are bound to be
totally ineffective because their effect will be
fully discounted in rational expectations; (iii)
nor can the government successfully pursue ad
hoc measures to offset shocks. The private sector
is already taking care of any anticipated
shock; therefore government policy could conceivably
help only if the government information
was better than that of the public, which is
impossible, by the very definition of rational
expectations. Under these conditions, ad hoc
stabilization policies are most likely to produce
instead further destabilizing shocks.
These are clearly remarkable conclusions, and
a major rediscovery for it had all been said 40
years ago by Keynes in a well-known passage of
The General Theory:
If, indeed, labour were always in a position
to take action (and were to do so),
whenever there was less than full employment,
to reduce its money demands by
concerted action to whatever point was
required to make money so abundant rela-