process of growth. Saving is an interesting
topic in its own right, but the more
''open economy" is the situation being
studied, the less saving has to do with
investment. Saving takes on great importance
in closed-economy models focused
on aggregate growth, in which
case it is equal to investment. It gets to
be almost meaningless as one focuses on
the growth of cities and regions, or on
firms and industries.

(iii) The importance of viewing the residual
as an umbrella covering real cost reductions
of all kinds, and of recognizing that
we are closer to home thinking that RCR
takes 1001 forms than that it can be well
represented by one or two or three
aggregate-style variables.
(b) In principle, the accumulation of human
capital by the laborforce should be represented
in the labor contribution of the
growth equation, or in a bifurcation of this
contribution into one due to raw labor, the
other to human capital. It is in a term like
iwiALi that one captures the shifting skill
composition of the labor force. In particular,
we capture here the higher wages that are the
fruits of investment in education and training,
which are the benefits that the workers themselves
perceive. These should be kept separate
from any externalities education might
have.

It is important to try to keep this internalized
part of the story out of the residual, so that we
can straightforwardly interpret the residual as
real cost reduction.

(c) To study externalities due to education,
training, or human capital, we should not be
content with broad generalizations such as
"TFP growth is higher in entities with lots of
human capital per worker." We should try to
figure out how this externality works. Is it
higher forfirms with high incidence of human
capital? Is it higher for industries or sectors?
Or are human capital externalities more spatial
in nature, making more efficient the economic
life of the cities, provinces, states, or nations
which have high concentrations of human capital?
And if this is a fruitful trail to pursue, at
what type and size of geographical units do
these externalities typically work?
(d) The same goes for economies of scale.
We should not be satisfied with vague attributions
of economies of scale, say, at the level
of the national economy. Instead, we should
pursue the matter. If the economies of scale
are national, through what channels do they
work, and what evidence do we have to look
at to see them in operation? In particular, what
is their connection to real cost reductions
where they really happen-i.e., at the level of
the firm? Economies of scale at the levels of
the firm and the industiy are easier to visualize.
Here, too, however, the task is to check
them out-to see if the real cost reductions of
firms are linked to the initial sizes of those
firrns themselves, or of the industries in which
they operate, and of the direction (up or down)
in which output is moving.
(e) Perhaps most important of all, we
should really try to take full advantage of evidence
at the firm level. I think particularly of
identifying considerable numbers of outstanding
cases of TFP improvements and TFP decline,
and studying them one by one to try to
ferret out the sources of their big real cost reductions
and real cost increases. You can be
pretty sure, if there have been big real cost
reductions in a firm, some people in that firm
have a pretty good idea of where those reductions
came from and how they were accomplished.
By capturing this grassroots evidence,
we can put some added discipline into our ruminations
about the nature of TFP at the aggregate
level. We must follow up on the sort
of work pioneered by Jacob Schmookler
(1966) and Edwin Mansfield (1995). In general,
our aggregate story should be compatible
with, and comfortably contain, what we see at
the grassroots level. In particular our overall
picture of TFP improvement should comfortably
accept the overwhelming evidence of the
"'mushroomss" rather than "yeast" nature of
the process.

(f ) Special urgency applies to the study of
declining total factor productivity at both the
firm and the industry levels. The pervasiveness
of declining TFP is perhaps the most profound
conclusion to emerge from the empirical links
that I have reported here. As a profession, we
obviously have been aware of its existence at
the industry level for virtually all studies that