the fact that we live in a world that is con-
tinually changing. And here I want to pose
two questions: First, to what extent does
the changing institutional environment af-
fect the relevance of the analytical tools
that we use and the assumptions that we
make about the determinants of individual
and group behavior? (Here, of course, I am
still raising the question of relevance.) And,
second, why do we ask so few questions
about why and how the institutional en-
vironment has changed in the way that it
has, and what are its internal dynamics
that will lead it to change in particular
ways in the future-not only in the United
States but in other countries? A few econo-
mists have addressed themselves to this
range of questions, notably Karl Marx and
Joseph Schumpeter. Among living econo-
mists, three who at least raise this range
of issues are John Kenneth Galbraith,
Gunnar Myrdal, and, in the Marxist
tradition, Paul Sweezy."1
Certainly the outstanding example of
the failure of economic theory to adapt its
analytical tools to the changing institu-
tional environment must be the stubborn
adherence to the assumption of perfect
competition, a concept which has been de-
scribed as being "as pervasive and funda-
mental as any in the whole structure of
classical and neoclassical economic theory"
(Stigler, p. 234).12 Indeed for a century or
so, economists have toiled to make more
precise the notion of a perfectly competi-
tive market. Over this same period, of
course, the character of actual markets has
been changing in many ways. While im-
provements in transportation and com-
munication have tended to promote com-
petition in expanding markets, the growth
of large firms and the spread of industrial
concentration have made oligopoly a much
more relevant model for industrial markets
than the perfectly competitive model
which today's theorists insist on using. It
is true that sporadic efforts have been
made to develop a theory of oligopoly, and
for a while high hopes were held for what
might be learned from game theory; but
no generally accepted theory of oligopoly
has yet emerged. At the same time, the
emphasis on general equilibrium theory
has tended to turn attention away from
this egregious departure from perfect com-
petition.13
It is true, of course, that in the 1930's,
under the stimulus of the pioneering works
by Edward Chamberlin and Joan Robin-
son, we developed a theory of monopolistic
or imperfect competition, centering on the
notion of product differentiation. And at
the same time increased attention began
to be paid to the determinants of oligopo-
listic behavior. At the applied level, the
field of industrial organization was born.
But while this applied field has continued
to thrive, general micro-economic theory
and the applied work in this area have
largely parted company. General equilib-
rium theory (and not only this branch of
theory) has returned to the assumption of
perfect competition. The notion of a slop-
ing demand curve for the individual firm
seemingly did not add much to the general
theorist's tool box, and the new mathe-
matical economics found it more exciting
to pick up the challenge of Walras and
Pareto and to turn to general equilibrium
analysis and to setting forth the conditions
of Pareto optimality. And for this the as-
sumption of perfect competition was con-
venient if not essential. As William Baumol