difficult to see how the federal government
can commit itself to what reactors public
utilities will be purchasing 20 years from
now. The United States can have a plan to
mandate fuel-efficiency standards for automobiles,
but it takes 10 years for the standards
to work their way into the automobile
fleet, and there is no accounting procedure
that will estimate the effect on motor-fuel
consumption of any level of average fuel
efficiency a decade from now.
The current popular expectation is that
participation in any greenhouse regime will
take the form of commitments to specified
percentage reductions of emissions below
those of some specified year, like 1990 or
2000. I cannot help believing that adoption
of such a commitment is an indication of
insincerity. A serious proposal would specify
policies, like taxes, regulations, and subsidies
and would specify programs (like research
and development), accompanied by
very uncertain estimates of their likely effect
on emissions. In an international public
forum, governments could be held somewhat
accountable for the policies they had
or had not put into effect, but probably not
for the emissions levels achieved.
Such a modest beginning will require
finding a way to sublimate the current international
enthusiasm for a new universalist
greenhouse regime into institutional arrangements
that are helpful but noncommittal
when the U.N. Conference on Environment
and Development convenes next
June. This will require an understanding
among the developed countries that it is
initially up to them to find a way to mobilize
their populations in support of national
greenhouse policies.

Ix

A major commitment to financing emissions
abatement in the developing world is
surely too far away to need specific plans
now. A developing-world carbon-abatement
effort would, in principle, be altogether different
from foreign aid as we have known it
since World War II. In principle it would all
be directed, from whatever sources and
through whatever channels, to protecting
that same global common. There would be,
for the first time, a single criterion: economizing
carbon. In the abstract, aid recipients
in the war on greenhouse gases would
not compete; they would not make IndiaPakistan
comparisons, or Arab-Israel, or
Poland-Czechoslovakia. All would in principle
benefit equally from maximum carbon
conservation, wherever it could be achieved.
Trees may grow more rapidly, in carbon
content, in Madras or Szechuan or Borneo
or Alaska or South Carolina, but if someone
were willing to finance the growth of a tree
to absorb carbon dioxide, the citizens of
those states should not have the slightest
care where the tree were to be planted; they
all benefit solely from the carbon fixed in
the tree and benefit more, the faster the
tree grows, no matter where it grows.
It wouldn't work that way, of course.
Somebody gets the shade, or leases land for
the tree; and if it's not a tree but a nuclear
power plant to supplant coal, there are local
impacts that make huge differences, and
negotiations over sharing the cost differential
between the coal and the nuclear plants.
But it is worth noticing that if there were a
"pure" carbon-abatement or carbon-absorbing
technology, one that accomplished nothing
else, there should be no dispute about
locating it wherever it would be most effective.
That is new in foreign aid and foreign
investment.

If the developed countries ever manage
to act together toward the developing countries,
their bargaining position is probably
enhanced by the fact that cleaner fuels and
more efficient fuel technologies bring a
number of benefits other than reduced carbon,
and recipients of greenhouse aid will
be actively interested parties, not merely
neutral agents attending to the global atmosphere.
At the same time, large nations like
India and China will be aware of the extortionate
power that resides in ambitious
coal-development projects.
On a greatly reduced scale, there may be
something constructive to do more immediately.
There is a huge difference between
transferring "technology" and transferring
capital goods that embody technology or,
going further, financing entire investments