would remove the very serious deterrent
effect of the property tax on improvements.
Unfortunately from the standpoint of a national
employment policy, this tax is largely
levied by local governments, which are often
constrained by constitutional provisions or
state laws. Nevertheless some means of
bringing pressure to bear on these governments
to make this change might be found.
Some Pennsylvania governments are already
doing this. When levied for municipal purposes,
it might be appropriate to exempt
from the tax a flat amount per square foot
as representing the value of circumambient
agricultural land for which the urban government
can claim no credit; this would also
mitigate discriminations at jurisdictional
boundaries.

It is perhaps worth noting that the significance
of a government debt would be drastically
different in a community relying exclusively
on a land-value tax. Such a debt
would in effect be a collective mortgage on
the land, especially if it can be assumed that
land values in the community will vary proportionately
over time. Since the interest on
the community debt will generally be lower
than interest charged on individual mortgages,
it can be in the general interest of all
the taxpayers of the community for the government
to borrow as much as the market
will take, even to finance current outlays,
provided a suitable margin is left to deal
with emergencies. On the other hand such
debt financing performs no recycling of savings,
there is no room for Keynesian fiscal
policy, and Ricardian equivalence is in full
sway. This does not detract, however, from
the powerful stimulating effect of a reduction
in the tax on improvements.
VII. Limitations of "Supply-Side" Measures
Under current conditions, however, such
"supply-side" measures designed to operate
by reducing the cost of capital are likely to
be severely limited in their effect as long as
nearly all types of capital facilities are idle
or underutilized. Very little "widening" investment
is likely to take place as long as
there is excess capacity in place. At most,
some "deepening" investment in new products
or technologies may take place, or there
may be corners of the economy where relatively
rapid growth has kept capacity fully
utilized. Even in such cases, investment in
capital facilities may depend more on appraisals
of an uncertain market for the
product than on the cost of capital.
This is likely to be true not only of tax
policy but even more of monetary policy. In
any attempt to emerge from present rates of
unemployment even only down to the
NIARU within any reasonable time period,
monetary policy is likely to prove a weak
reed, sometimes aptly described as pushing
on a string. The main difficulty is that monetary
policy bears primarily on short-term
interest rates and credit availability and in
its usual practice does not directly control
long-term rates, which are the important
rates for most decisions involving real
durable capital formation. The posture of
the Federal Reserve System in holding itself
ready to slam on the brakes at the first sign
of resurgent inflation is poorly adapted to
bringing long-term rates down. It does not
appear that the Fed has either the will or
the resources to do enough about long-term
rates to do very much to increase capital
formation, especially when idle and underused
capacity pervades much of the economy.


VIII. Savings Recycling by Government
This brings us inevitably around to fiscal
policy. Here it is necessary to stop thinking
of the conventional nominal budget deficit,
or even of a current-account deficit in a
budget drawn up in terms of distinguishing
capital and current-account items, and to
start thinking of fiscal policy in terms of its
role in recycling savings, in excess of what is
recycled by private investment, into the
stream of purchasing power. The conventional
wisdom seems to argue that increased
employment requires that the economy
grow, growth requires investment, and investment
requires savings; therefore let's
encourage saving through IRA's, tax expenditure
rather than income, and tighten our