may or may not look strikingly different
from the pictures presented of narrower bodies
of data. It may indeed be hard to know
until we have the fruits of some redirection
of economic research. But is it not clearly
these broader, conceptually relevant measures
on which we should be focusing in
analysis, evaluation, and the determination
of public policy?
III. New Behavioral Relations, Theory
and Policy
All of this is not just a matter of changing
the numbers we associate with familiar variables.
Rather, it alters old relations and reveals
important new ones. Take the wellknown
loglinear production function, for example.
In its most common Cobb-Douglas
form, we are accustomed to relating output
to private "capital" and "labor." David
Aschauer (1988) reports significant contributions
to private output from government infrastructure
capital. I have added arguments
for R&D and human capital and found both
significantly positive while the coefficient of
tangible capital is sharply negative.'8 I am
hardly ready to claim on the basis of these
single-equation estimates that more tangible
capital will generally reduce output, and take
my results with some reserve, but I suggest
that a broader view of capital would give
pause to enthusiastic advocates of business
investment tax credits and other "incentives"
of this genre.
Revision of the traditional consumption
function indicates that, along with the expected
coefficient in the neighborhood of .9
for labor income after taxes, we get a (too
high, admittedly) coefficient of about .3 for
the real net debt of the government and .06
for tangible capital. (Household tangible
capital, perhaps a proxy for permanent income,
has a coefficient of about .2.) Working
with investment functions, I find that the
acceleration principle explains much of business
investment in structures and equipment.
But increases in market output do not appear
to have generated subsequent accumulation
of the much larger amounts of other
capital which seem to have so much to do
with total output and productivity.
Measures of investment closer to their theoretical
construct would throw light on some
of the limitations of "q-theory," which purports
to relate business capital expenditures
to the ratio, q, of the market value of the
firm to the replacement cost of its "capital.
" When that ratio is high, it is presumed
that firms will sell shares or otherwise see fit
to raise funds to add to their fixed capital.
When q is low, it will rather pay to buy fixed
capital by buying other firms or simply to
use funds to buy back outstanding stock
rather than buy more expensive physical assets.

But does not this theory relate very largely
to a view of dichotomous labor and "capital"
as the factors of production? In truth, firms
invest much in the experience, skills, and
dedication of their labor, which then constitute
an important component of capital
value. Much of the value of the firm constituting
the numerator of the q-ratio is determined
by TISA components of capital that
do not enter into its replacement-cost denominator.
To the extent these were substitutes
for conventionally included capital,
they might even bring about a negative relation
between the conventional measures of
business investment and q. If all capital were
included, the values of q would likely be
vastly different and critical divergences between
average and marginal q exposed. The
remoteness of the relevance of a comprehensive
q to investment in the small spectrum
of business plant and equipment would
become clear, and with that an explanation
of some of the well-known difficulties in
empirical implementation of the q-theory
approach.19
18See Eisner (1989), Table D.I.  19Further difficulties in giving flesh to investment
and production theory may well stem from problems in
getting sound measures of real output. These depend
considerably on the quality of our price deflators, too
often-despite warnings from the BEA of the need for
further work on a number of problems, including measure
of quality change, weighting, and import and input
prices-taken for granted. If, as there is good ground to
suspect, they have frequently overstated price inflation
while correspondingly understating quality improve-