Inflation belongs in this litany because
our pursuit of alternative welfare goals has
thus far also involved a tolerance, indeed a
pressure, for chronic budgetary deficits, and
an understandable political incapacity to
employ monetary and fiscal restraint forcefully
and consistently at the risk of elevated
unemployment. Inflation, in conjunction
with tax rules and accounting practices designed
for a stable price regime, has meant
very high marginal taxes on returns to
capital. In the judgement of some public
finance experts, it has also meant a differential
burden on business investment compared
with that on household borrowing,
spending, and investing.'6 If there are fears
of accelerated inflation in the future, they
carry the prospect of still higher taxes and
lower returns while the erratic nature of
rapid inflation makes the future more difficult
to discern and increases the sense of
risk. And if the same fears give rise to a
vision of price controls, the risks of investment
and innovation are compounded. In
any event, inflation compels- or threatens
to compel-governments to reduce capacity
utilization below its potential. Therefore
inflation acts to diminish one of the inducements
to invest, as the 1980 business contraction
following on financial disorder illustrates.
We should remember, moreover,
that there is an element of vicious circularity
in this aspect of our present conjecture. Inflation
has deleterious effects on productivity
growth-and unexpected declines in
productivity growth exacerbate inflation.
This range of considerations leads some
students to the view that the pursuit of
alternative welfare goals accounts for a very
considerable part of the retardation. Fellner,
whom I mentioned before, suggests that "the
causes of at least 1 percentage point annual
slackening of the trend in output per
worker's hour can be found among the 'suspects"
' (p. 10). That loss is equal to one-half
the observed difference between the privatesector
productivity growth since 1973 and
that during the quarter century between 1948
and 1973.
Such numbers and the argument that leads
to them should be understood to be no more
than what they are-a prima facie indication
that something very substantial may be
involved in the choices we make between
productivity growth and alternative welfare
goals. I would not mention them if I did not
fear that there is much to the problem, if
not as a cause of the recent abrupt retardation,
then as a longer-term secular constraint.
Yet, at the present time the argument
is only speculative, and the estimated
loss still more so. The theoretical and
quantitative issues are unsettled and deserve
our most urgent attention.'7  16See Feldstein and Lawrence Summers. This study
measures the extra taxes imposed by inflation on corporate
income both at the level of the corporations
themselves and at those of the households and institutions
which receive dividends and interest payments or
have an equity interest in the corporations. They find
that the combined excess tax due to inflation averaged
only 16.4 percent of corporate income tax from 1954
through 1968, but rose to an average of 52 percent
from 1969 through 1977. As a result, the reduction in
the effective combined tax on corporate income, which
had been accomplished by the tax acts of the early
1960's, was reversed. The combined tax, which had
fallen as low as 55 percent of real corporate income
from 1962 through 1967, rose to an average of 68
percent from 1968 through 1977. This somewhat
exceeded the rate of the latter 1950's, when the combined
tax averaged 65 percent of corporate income
from 1954 through 1961.
There is a presumption, though no direct proof, that
the increase in the effective tax rate reduces the real
after-tax rate of return on capital and, therefore, the
rate of business capital formation. Feldstein and
Summers also argue that, since the impact of inflation
on taxes works unevenly, it makes for capital misallocation
among industries, encourages more investment
in inventories and less in equipment and structures,
and tends to shift investment away from the corporate
sector and towards residential construction and
consumer durables (pp. 47- 48). See also Patric
Hendershott. Inflation, in conjunction with the tax
system also works to increase real tax rates on forms of
income other than capital, but this effect is relatively
small. See Stanley Fischer and Franco Modigliani (pp.
10- 11) which provides a general discussion of the costs
of inflation.  17In particular, it is possible to propose calculations
of the effect of cyclical or other transient changes in
the intensity of resource use which suggest that no
underlying slowdown occurred before 1973. (See
Denison, chs. 7-9.) On such a view, there is a strong
suggestion that our troubles do not lie in any generalized
impact of the welfare and regulatory programs of
government, but are mainly confined to the effects of
two developments which either occurred or intensified