24-
20-
16-
U
or a,~~~~~~~~~~~
m~
LL 1
6
4
-6 -4.5 -3 -1.5 0 1.5 3 4.5 6
TFP Growth Rate
FIGURE 6B. MAXIMUM AVERAGE ANNUAL TFP GROWTH RATE (MAX. ORDINATE OF TFP PROFILE):
MEXICAN MANUFACTURING, 1984-1994
FREQUENcy DISTRIBUTION, 44 INDUSTRIAL BRANCHES
value added as his quantity variable, this suggests
that, if anything, the substitution of the
"true quantity variable" q for observed value
added v would have given results with
greater dispersion of TFP, and consequently
greater overshooting in his sunrise-sunset
diagrams.
The above demonstration should be taken as
merely suggestive. It is not important to me
that Torre' s results underestimate the variability
of the different firms' TFP experience. It is
only important that measurement error should
not be the principle determinant of those results.
On this I feel very confident. In my view,
it really is "a jungle out there," with winners
and losers in every period-good as well as
bad.
As I have noted earlier, we are only just beginning
a systematic study of TFP among U.S.
firms, so I can offer no display comparable to
Torre' s.
However, Robles (1997) did examine the
experience of 12 firms in the U.S. oil industry.
His results are summarized in Figure 7. But
Robles tells basically the same story as Torre.
Three firms out of the 12 were more than sufficient
to generate the real cost reduction experienced
by the total group. Half (or almost
half) of the firms had negative TFP growth in
each period. And the cumulated amount of this
negative TFP growth was sizeable when measured
against the total TFP performance of the
industry.
What I see in TFP performance is quite analogous
to what I see in the stock market pages of
the newspaper. There are winners and losers
eveiy day, every month, and every year. The
gains and losses come from all sorts of causes.
World price shocks can drive firms into negative
TFP performance if the consequent output reductions
are greater than the reductions of inputs.
So, too, can cyclical or secular declines in
demand, including those caused by the successful
actions of competitors.
When firms are under stress, they typically
fight to stay alive. Maybe they fight for too
long in some cases, in the sense that less of
society's resources would be wasted if they