THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
makes sense to have a progressive benefit formula;
that it makes sense to limit benefits to
those who are old enough and stop working or
are even older (whether they stop or not); and
that having been generous to early cohorts, it
makes sense now to continue with a system that
is only partially funded.
This is not to say that I agree with all of the
details of the current structure by any means. Of
course we should change benefit and tax rules
so that we restore actuarial balance-so that
projected revenues are sufficient to pay for projected
benefits over at least 75 years. And other
changes would be desirable as well. I am just
arguing that the overall design of Social Security
makes good sense. In addition to presenting
the basis of my support for the broad structure
of Social Security, I will identify some rules
needing change and I will speculate on why
some economists seem to have a different view
from mine.
But I will not get into the debate of whether
there should be fully funded individual accounts
financed from existing payroll tax revenues
(carve-out accounts). Nor shall I discuss the
political and economic issues associated with
the potential role of stocks in Social Security.
Those controversial subjects would take up
most of the address and I prefer to write about
more fundamental issues. Those interested in
my view as to why carve-out accounts would
not be good policy in the United States today
can turn to Chapter 8 in my book with Peter R.
Orszag (2004), which also contains a package
of changes to restore actuarial balance and
strengthen protection of some vulnerable
groups. We discuss the potential role of stocks
as well.
I will not say much about the advantage of a
mandate to save for retirement-there is little
call for eliminating such a mandate. After a
discussion of a framework for thinking about
Social Security (Section I), I will consider annuitization
(Section II), treatment of the family
(Section III), the interaction among income distribution,
insurance, and labor supply (Section
IV), the degree of funding (Section V), and
adjustments over time to benefits and taxes
(Section VI).3 Not discussed but worth keeping
3My approach has some similarity to the three-  dimensional analysis of different pension systems in Assar  in mind are the supporting antipoverty programs
as they affect the elderly [Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) and Medicaid], and the
provision of medical insurance for the elderly
(Medicare). Nor will I discuss the Disability
Insurance program, which is a critical part of
Social Security.
I. Providing Retirement Income
One-third of the elderly received at least 90
percent of their income from Social Security in
2001, with nearly two-thirds receiving at least
half (Social Security Administration, 2003). Yet
Social Security was always meant to be a foundation
for retirement income and not a level to
be relied on exclusively. The average new
award for a retired worker in 2002 was just over
$900 per month. For a worker retiring in 2002 at
age 62 (the modal retirement age), a worker in
the middle of the earnings distribution received
a benefit of roughly one-third of (wageindexed)
lifetime average earnings in 2000 dollars.
If the worker had a nonworking spouse of
the same age, the benefit would be largerabout
one-half of the worker's lifetime average
earnings.4 These are low replacement ratesyou
would not want to retire on one-third to
one-half of what you had earned on average in
your lifetime. Benefits would look even lower
compared to earnings over the last decade of
work for a worker with the typical age-earnings
profile. As a foundation for retirement income,
Social Security is something substantial to build
on. As a level to live on, it is clearly inadequate.
Excessive reliance on Social Security, despite
its relatively low replacement rates, together
with a more general picture of many workers
with inadequate wealth at retirement age, seem
Lindbeck and Mats Persson (2003). They refer to the three
dimensions as the distinction between defined benefit and
defined contribution, funded and unfunded, and actuarial  and nonactuarial. All three are matters of degree, not zero-  one choices. A primary difference is that my presentation is  focused on issues particularly salient in the U.S. context,  while I think that theirs was influenced by the Swedish  reform.
4 Of women receiving benefits in 2002, roughly one-  third received benefits solely as beneficiaries. The rest had  at least ten years of earnings history. For the latter group,  the replacement rate for the couple would be lower than the  one reported for the case of a nonearning spouse.
MARCH 2004
2