can turn out anything up to 2'ym without
affecting unit costs, and three firms can produce
as much as 3 ym, that is, as much as
4ym. In sum, the intervals of linear homogeneity
for the industry are the following:
Interval 1: from ym to I ym
Interval 2: from 2ym to 22ym
Interval 3: from 3ym to 4ym
Interval 4: from 4ym to 54ym
Interval 5: from Sytm to 62y'
That is, each interval begins at an integer
multiple of ym and extends 1/3 ym further
than its predecessor. Thus, beyond 3ym
successive intervals begin to touch or overlap
and that is why linear homogeneity extends
everywhere beyond 3ym as I claimed.3
There is one complication in the multiproduct
case which I have deliberately slid
over, feeling the discussion was already complicated
enough. The preceding argument assumes
implicitly that the firms producing the
industry output all employ the same output
proportions as those in the industry output
vector. For otherwise, it is not legitimate to
move outward along a single ray as the number
of firms is increased. But suppose increased
industry output were to permit savings
through increased specialization. Might
there not be constant returns with fixed output
proportions and yet economies of scale
for the industry overall? This problem is
avoided by our complementarity assumption
used to account for the industry's multiproduct
operation-our U-shaped trans-ray cross
section. This, in effect, rules out such savings
from specialization in the regions where linear
homogeneity also rules out savings from
increased scale.
This, then, completes my discussion of
oligopoly equilibrium in perfectly contestable
markets, which we have seen, yields a
determinate set of prices and outputs that is
not dependent upon assumptions about the
nature of incumbent firm's expectations relating
to entrants' behavior and offers us a
concrete and favorable conclusion on the
welfare implications of contestable oligopoly.
III. Intertemporal Vulnerability to
Inefficient Entry
Having so far directed attention to areas
in which the invisible hand manifests unexpected
strength, I should like to end my
story by dealing with an issue in relation to
which it is weaker than some of us might
have expected. As I indicated before, this is
the issue of intertemporal production involving
durable capital goods.
The analysis is far more general than the
following story suggests, but even the case I
describe is sufficiently general to make the
point. We deal with an industry in which a
product is offered by a single firm that provides
it period after period. The equilibrium
quantity of the commodity that is demanded
grows steadily with the passage of time in a
manner that is foreseen without uncertainty.
Because of economies of scale in the production
of capacity the firm deliberately builds
some excess capacity to take care of anticipated
growth in sales volume. But there is
some point, let us say, z =45 years in the
future, such that it would be uneconomic to
take further growth in sales volume into
account in the initial choice of capacity. This
is so because the opportunity (interest) cost
of the capacity that remains idle for 45 or
more years exceeds the savings made possible
by the economies of scale of construction.
Thus, after 45 years it will pay the firm
to undertake a second construction project
to build the added capacity needed to produce
the goods demanded of it.
Suppose that in every particular period
our producer is a natural monopolist, that is,
he produces the industry's supply of its one
commodity at a cost lower than it can be
done by any two or more enterprises. Then
considering that same product in different
periods to be formally equivalent to different
goods we may take our supplier to be an
intertemporal natural monopolist in a multiproduct
industry. That is, no combination of
3The reader can readily generalize this result. If the
flat-bottomed segment for the firm extends from ym to
ym(l + I/w), where w is an integer, then there will be w
regions of linear homogeneity in the industry cost function
and it will be linearly homogeneous for any output
y , wy mtwo