(as in traditional public choice theory)
.

IX. Concluding Remarks

Perhaps I could end by briefly returning
to the questions with which I began. Arrow's
impossibility theorem does indeed identify a
profound difficulty in combining individual
preference orderings into aggregative
social welfare judgments (Section II). But
the result must not be seen as mainly a
negative one, since it directly leads on to
questions about how to overcome these
problems. In the context of social welfare
judgments, the natural resolution of these
problems lies in enriching the informational
base, and there are several distinct ways of
doing this (Section IV). These approaches
are used in practice for aggregative judgments
made by individuals, but they can
also be used for organized procedures for
arriving at social measures of poverty, inequality,
distribution-adjusted real national
incomes, and other such aggregative indicators.


Second, Buchanan's questioning of the
concept of social preference (and of its use
as an ordering to make-or explain-social
choices) is indeed appropriate in the case of
social decision mechanisms, though less so
for social welfare judgments (Section III).
The Arrow theorem, in its original form,
does not apply once social decision-making
is characterized in terms of choice functions
without any imposed requirement of
intermenu consistency. However, when the
natural implications of taking a .choicefunctional
view of social decisions are
worked out, Arrow's conditions have to be
correspondingly restated, and then the impossibility
result returns in its entirety once
again (Section III). The idea of social preference
or internal consistency of social
choice is basically redundant for this impossibility
result. So Buchanan's move does not
negate Arrow's impossibility. On the other
hand, it is an important departure in its own
right.

Coming to terms with the impossibility
problem in the case of social decision mechanisms
is largely a matter of give and take
between different principles with respective
appeals. This calls for a less rigid interpretation
of the role of axiomatic demands on
permissible social decision rules (Section V).
Third, Buchanan's argument for a more
procedural view of social decisions has much
merit. Nevertheless, there are good reasons
to doubt the adequacy of a purely procedural
view (independent of consequences), just
as there are serious defects in narrowly consequentialist
views (independent of procedures)
. Procedural concerns can, however,
be amalgamated with consequential ones by
recharacterizing states of affairs appropriately,
and the evaluation of states can then
take note of the two aspects together (Section
VI). This combination is especially important
in accommodating liberty and rights
in social judgments as well as social decision
mechanisms (Section VII).
Finally, there is room for paying more
attention to the rationality of individual behavior
as an integral component of rational
social decisions. In particular, the practical
reach of social choice theory, in its traditional
form, is considerably reduced by its
tendency to ignore value formation through
social interactions. Buchanan is right to emphasize
the role of public discussion in the
development of preferences (as an important
part of democracy). However, traditional
public choice theory is made unduly
narrow by the insistence that individuals
invariably behave as homo economicus
(a subject on which social choice theory
is much more permissive). This uncompromising
restriction can significantly misrepresent
the nature of social concerns and
values. But aside from this descriptive limitation,
there is also an important issue of
"practical reason" here. Many of the more
exacting problems of the contemporary
world-varying from famine prevention to
environmental preservation-actually call
for value formation through public discussion
(Section VIII).

On the rationality of social decisions,
many important lessons have emerged from
the discipline of social choice theory as well
as the public choice approach. In fact, we
can get quite a bit more by combining these
lessons. As a social choice theorist, I had