The improvement in living standards, life
expectancy, and economic growth prospects in
developing countries ranks among the most
important economic success stories since the
Second World War. Growth in some has been
dramatic, and while progress has been far from
uniform, there are grounds for optimism that
future growth prospects can be even better
than performance to date.
One factor accounting for that success has
been improved understanding and adoption of
economic policies much more conducive to satisfactory
economic growth than was the case in
the 1950's and 1960's. That better understanding,
in turn, resulted from a combination and
interaction of research and experience with development
and development policy.

Ideas with regard to trade policy and economic
development are among those that have
changed radically. Then and now, it was recognized
that trade policy was central to the overall
design of policies for economic development.
But in the early days, there was a broad consensus
that trade policy for development should
be based on "import substitution." By this
was meant that domestic production of importcompeting
goods should be started and increased
to satisfy the domestic market under incentives
provided through whatever level of protection
against imports, or even import prohibition, was
necessary to achieve it. It was thought that import
substitution in manufactures would be synonymous
with industrialization, which in turn
was seen as the key to development.
The contrast with views today is striking. It
is now widely accepted that growth prospects
for developing countries are greatly enhanced
through an outer-oriented trade regime and
fairly uniform incentives (primarily through
the exchange rate) for production across exporting
and import-competing goods.' Some
countries have achieved high rates of growth
with outer-oriented trade strategies. Policy reform
efforts removing protection and shifting
to an outer-oriented trade strategy are under
way in a number of countries. It is generally
believed that import substitution at a minimum
outlived its usefulness and that liberalization
of trade and payments is crucial for both industrialization
and economic development.
While other policy changes also are necessary,
changing trade policy is among the essential
ingredients if there is to be hope for improved
economic performance.

And, while there are still some disagreements
over particular aspects of trade policy
both among academic researchers and policy
makers,2 the current consensus represents a
distinct advance over the old one, in terms
both of knowledge and of the prospects it
offers for rapid economic growth. While it
will no doubt be further refined in light of