much like the difference between people of
types 01 and &2 in the figure. Workers choosing
safe jobs are willing to pay at least as much for
safety as people choosing risky jobs, so the
wage premium on risky jobs is likely to be a
lower bound on the average person's willingness
to pay for safety.

Thaler and I estimated a "value of life" of
about $800,000 in dollars of Year 2000 purchasing
power. Other labor-market studies using
data on a wider range of risks have found
much larger values. The broader range of risks
in these studies is the most probable reason
for the larger estimates: they include more
between-variation (e.g., the differences between
z1 and Zh), whereas our study was largely confined
to within-variation (around zl). Similar
considerations apply to housing and land market
studies that impute values for crime, climate,
and pollution. Here, too, revealed
preference implies that estimated pollution and
crime gradients are likely to be lower bounds
for the average citizen because they ignore important
sorting considerations.

C. Time-Series Imputations
The main practical difficulty in assessing
changing standards of living is that goods
change their character over time. The prices of
tractors and automobiles today differ from 30
years ago, not only because manufacturing productivity
and input prices have changed, but
also because the products themselves have improved.
The nature of the problem is starkest
when entirely new goods appear on the market.
If their introduction is successful and they supplant
older varieties, how should they be linked
into a price index?

Conceptually, the only possibility is to think
in terms of the costs of providing ultimate services.
Technical changes reduce the cost of services.
Autos were successful because they were
a superior way of producing transport services
compared to animals. Electricity produced heat
and light more efficiently than steam and lantems,
and radio, television, and movies reduced
the cost of entertainment services relative to live
performances. In these examples, technical
changes should be factored into price indexes
for transport services, power, and entertainment
services. In practice it is extremely difficult to
link entirely new goods to old goods in this
way. Adjusting for quality improvements of existing
goods is more manageable.
Rising incomes naturally cause product quality
to improve over time, because the income
elasticity of demand for quality is positive.
Even when the prices per unit quality of goods
do not change, rising incomes increase the demand
for quality and raise average transactions
prices over time. Offsetting the rise in demand
for quality is that some aspects of quality (like
ornate detail on early twentieth-century houses)
are labor intensive, which causes their prices to
rise as incomes rise. As long as the cost factor is
not dominant, there is upward bias in measured
prices and downward bias in measured real living
standards from a change in the composition
of goods toward more expensive varieties.
Transactions prices rise not because cost has
increased, but because the quality of what is
being referred to as a particular good has increased.
Income effects are represented by
movements along a given p( z) locus in Figure
1. The same envelope of offer functions define
p(z), but bid functions shift up and to the right
as income rises because the willingness to pay
for increments of z increases with income. 01
and 0& in Figure 1 could represent two people
with the same underlying utility functions but
different incomes. With constant returns to
scale in production, prices of each variety do
not change as income rises, but average quality
purchased and average transactions prices both
increase. We should not confuse movements
along the p( z) locus with changes in the cost of
living. Most consumption decisions change as
income rises, and these are part and parcel of
the same general phenomenon. Standardized
comparisons that control for the changing composition
of goods eliminate this kind of bias.
To assess changes in the real costs of living,
we should account for shifts in the price-quality
locus or technological changes that extend the
real range of choice. Such shifts can cause
quality-specific prices either to rise or fall. For
example, p( z) and the cost of living go up in the
income-increasing experiment above if goods
are supplied inelastically. For example, rising
real incomes increase the demand for amenities
associated with geographic location, raising
site values and the costs of housing services
in the preferred locations. On the other hand,