the professionalization of the securities
business. Very likely this tends to homogenize
views, increasing the herd instinct
among bulls and bears, respectively.
The rewards/penalties system
for professionals works in that direction.
It is dangerous to be wrong in
support of an unpopular cause....
Professionals have made the market
efficient, in the narrow sense that there
is nothing of predictive value to be
learned from the past data of the
market. It is far from clear that they
have made it rational. There may be
something to be learned from the history
of mass delusions in the market
after all. [p. 38]
Modigliani and Cohn's suggestion may be
one such systematic mass delusion.
As one close to retirement, and one of
quite a number of us (I suspect) who have
left most of our retirement resources tied up
in CREF, I would of course, be pleased if
stock prices should return closer to their
average past relationship to earnings or dividends.
But I would not, I confess, find it a
confirmation of the rationality of my own
expectations. Personally, I long ago decided
that being an economist was not merely no
advantage, but probably a disadvantage in
the security markets; and I have never personally
participated in them. I have been
fearful, I suppose, of succumbing, myself, to
the herd instincts that I seem to observe
there. The broker who tells his customers
that Joe Granville is stupid, but that they
must pay attention to him because others
will, both assumes and encourages behavior
only one level removed from that of lemmings.

Because stock prices are not fully rational,
either in the large or even in the small,
sharp-eyed members of several generations
of my graduate students learned (not from
me) to support themselves in reasonable
comfort by playing on trivial systematic
anomalies that they had found in share price
movements. They succeeded, presumably, by
acting exactly as others do, but a trifle sooner.
Indeed, the lemming instinct affects participants
in other markets. One current example
is that of the international bankers,
whose loans to particular LDCs were safe
because-but only so long as-other international
bankers recognized exactly the same
source of safety.
Whether one describes investment decisions
in terms of the q formulation or in
some other way, prices in security markets
necessarily affect the volume of aggregate
investment. And, because such prices are
clearly not fully rational, investment is a
potential and actual source of exogenous disturbance
of macroeconomic equilibrium; and
successful government stabilization policies
are not, by definition, precluded.
Our stroll along the border between microand
macroeconomics comes to an end. What
can we conclude? I conclude that the rational
expectations model of economic behavior
adequately describes an important range
of economic activities, where prices adjust
smoothly and efficiently to clear markets and
to stabilize production and consumption over
time. But rational expectations do not adequately
explain other kinds of markets, where
speculative prices may systematically tend to
overshoot changing equilibrium levels: nor
yet another kind-including most labor
markets and many "customers markets"
-where price changes tend systematically to
undershoot changing equilibrium levels,
whether because of an inability to develop
efficient long-term contracts, the existence of
bilateral monopoly, or merely because of the
rapid pace of unpredictable technological,
institutional, or other exogenous change. All
of the resulting aberrant forms of microeconomic
behavior may in some sense be individually
"rational"; yet their macroeconomic
effects are often perverse.
Nevertheless, we economists do our best
to understand our world, and to discover
those dependable regularities of behavior
-whether or not fully rational-that provide
the basis for economics theories, which
we can then use to prescribe policies, whether
these policies are of laissez-faire or of selective
intervention. All forms of dependably
regular behavior that we seek to discover and
to describe-and not merely those that are
fully rational-are equally important parts
of the social science of Economics, that
Marshall once defined simply as "a study of