that in both cases the security services are
merely inputs which should not be taken to
change our measure of final product. With
the massive increases in expenditures for national
defense in recent years-whether justifiable
or not-the implications for our
measures of growth in GNP are substantial.5
II. Deficits and National Saving
and Investment
Substantial as are the differences between
income as usually measured and its theoretical
construct, they are relatively small compared
to the departures of conventionally
measured saving and investment from their
theoretical counterparts.6 Personal saving,
the difference between disposable personal
income and outlays, of which the latter is
chiefly consumption, is immediately suspect
because of the measures of both income and
consumption, as is business or corporate saving
because of questionable measures of
costs, investment, and profits.7 But the problem
is much larger.
Investment is the acquisition or production
of capital, which in turn contributes to
current and future output. Should not the
production of new automobiles then qualify
as investment, whether they are bought by
business or by households or by government?
Should research expenses not be considered
investment along with expenditures
for plant and equipment? Are the education
and training of our young not perhaps the
most important investment in future productivity
that we can make?8 Yet we count such
private expenditures as consumption and the
vast if insufficient amount of output in the
form of public education is excluded from
investment under the apparently somewhat
pejorative heading of "government spending.
"
With gross income identically equal to
gross output, gross saving is identically equal
to gross investment, including increases in
net claims on the rest of the world, and net
saving is thus the claims on net additions to
capital. Saving should then include the portion
of income used to invest in the human
capital of a college education as well as the
portions used to buy corporate bonds or put
into a pension fund.
We have been bombarded for some time
with the arguments in political circles, but
also from many economists, utilizing data
from conventional measures and accounts,
that " national saving" is too low, disastrously
low. This so-called national saving is
the sum of the personal and corporate saving,
which we have had reason to question,
and government saving or the government
budget surplus.9 These measures are far from
the theoretical constructs to which we might
expect them to correspond.
First, since government budget surpluses
-or deficits-are taken as government receipts
minus all government outlays, without
distinguishing between current and capital
5If government services are viewed as intermediate
product purchased by business with other than indirect
business taxes, there is a corresponding reduction in
national income.
6Discrepancies between theory and measure of national
income are not unique to U.S. accounts. They
arise as well with the accounts of other nations. Foreign
accounts, however, do usually include government capital
in saving and investment. This indeed generates
some of the gap between U.S. and other saving rates
that receive much attention. Hayashi (1986, p. 151)
attributes 3 to 5- percentage points in the difference
between Japanese and U.S. reported national saving
rates (as ratios of NNP) to the Japanese inclusion of net
government capital formation.
7It should be sobering to recall (see Robert Chirinko,
1987) the profusion of alarms about the decline in "net
investment" before the Department of Commerce (1981)
revised its figures dramatically upward, with increases
over the old series for the years 1975 to 1978 ranging
from a quarter to a third. The hue and cry did not pause
long, however, and current complaints about laggard
net investment evince no concern about critical measures
of depreciation mentioned above, or comparably
critical questions of price deflation and quality adjustment
noted below.
SSee, of course, Theodore Schultz (1961) and Gary
Becker (1964, 1975) and a vast literature on human
capital they have spawned. Failure to count education
as investment, and to recognize it generally in analyses
of capital formation, is perhaps the more remarkable in
view of the fact that already one of the seminal authors
is a Nobel Laureate and both are past Presidents of this
Association.
9The sum of federal, state, and local government
surpluses, in the United States.