THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
simulations have assumed that younger workers
perceive no increase in future benefits as a consequence
of additional earnings. This leads to a
big boost in apparent efficiency from a switch to
individual accounts if it is also assumed that
money going into individual accounts has no
implicit tax. Both of these assumptions seem
wrong to me.
I believe that there is wide awareness of the
existence of some link between earnings and
later benefits, although understanding of how
the link works is not so wide. Misperception of
the link sometimes takes the form of imagining
that Social Security is like a corporate defined
benefit pension that heavily weights later years.
This perception would correspond to an implicit
tax at some ages and an implicit subsidy at
others, not a full tax at all ages. The extent to
which labor supply is affected by concern that
there will be no benefits would be greatly modified
by any reform that restored actuarial balance,
not just one with individual accounts.
Insofar as workers have high subjective discount
rates, mandating savings in any form affects
labor incentives and the exact link between
taxes and benefits is of reduced consequence.
My sense of a small difference between pension
systems in incentives for younger workers is
supported by the evidence of quite modest labor
market responses in Latin American countries
that have introduced individual accounts.
I have now argued for the use of a mandatory
retirement income system paying annuitized
benefits to workers and their families based on
a progressive benefit formula and using a retirement
test at some ages but not at others. I turn
next to two issues that bear more on reform
options, as well as reflecting the history of the
system. First I will discuss the redistribution
across cohorts and then the use of automatic
indexing as well as periodic legislation.
V. Benefits by Cohort
Social Security is often criticized for distorting
labor supply and savings. Despite the linking
of these two decisions, the issues are very
different. I have already noted that mandatory
annuitization with uniform pricing distorts labor
supplies relative to an idealized alternative, but
seems to be a welfare improvement relative to a
world with no annuities. And I discussed other
labor market issues where Social Security combines
incentives with redistribution and insurance.
In contrast, the rules of Social Security do
not distort savings. That is, Social Security certainly
affects savings and so national capital.
But the term distortion is usually reserved for an
intervention that would prevent Pareto optimality
in an economy that would otherwise satisfy  the conditions of the Fundamental Welfare Theorem.
To examine this meaning of distort (as
opposed to merely change) we need to consider
the impact of Social Security on the marginal
return to private savings (the size of a tax
wedge). By itself, Social Security has no effect
on the return to marginal savings since benefit
levels do not depend on capital income. Social
Security does interact with the income tax, but
the effect of the existence of Social Security on
the income taxation of the return on marginal
savings can have either sign for differently situated
workers, although it probably includes a
wedge on average.54
A mandate to pay taxes and receive benefits
would affect private savings even if there were
no marginal distortion at all. Effects come from
the requirement that people pay taxes at levels
and times when they might not have saved the
same amount. Effects also come from redistribution,
both within and across generations, that
is, from income effects as opposed to substitution
effects. I am not aware of any study of the
impact on savings from the progressive benefit
formula-the presence of higher benefits relative
to taxes for low earners who have a lower
54 Perhaps the largest effect comes from the cutoffs
below which benefits are not taxed or are taxed at a lower
rate. Since the cutoffs are compared with income including  capital income, there is an increase in the tax wedge on  savings for those who are affected in this way. Another  effect comes from the possibility that taxable benefits might  increase the marginal tax bracket. But Social Security dis-  places some private savings. Whatever savings are dis-  placed by Social Security might themselves have affected  the marginal tax rates (depending on the tax treatment of  displaced savings). Moreover, one needs to consider the  effect of Social Security on the income tax rate when the  savings are done as well as when the proceeds are  received-the employer share of the payroll tax is not part  of taxable income for the income tax. Thus, the effect could
be positive or negative depending on the level of displaced  savings and their income tax treatment. This indirect link is  present in many other programs that are not talked about in  this way. For example, government support of education  raises earnings and so marginal tax rates. The implied  increase in savings distortions does not seem to be of
consequence.
MARCH 2004
14