expenditures, a major adjustment is immediately
in order, consistent with the practice of
private business, to exclude the capital expenditures
and include in current outlays
only depreciation charges. Second, just as
not all of nominal interest receipts should be
included in income, not all of government
nominal interest payments should be counted
in outlays. Rather these should be adjusted
for the changing real value of government
debt, due both to inflation itself and the
changing market price of securities associated
with changing interest rates, which latter
may relate in part to changing rates of inflation.
We should in effect be including in
government revenues the inflation tax on the
private holders of government securities or
the money backed by central bank holdings
of those securities, or including in outlays
only real interest payments.'0
These two adjustments, for capital expenditures
and for inflation, make such a huge
difference in the Federal government budget
as to wipe out the much decried "budget
deficit."" The first of them has an identical
effect in raising our measure of national saving,
greatly depressed in its conventional
measure by the negative contribution of the
presumed fiscal dis-saving."
Gross saving is identically equal to gross
private domestic investment plus net foreign
investment. The supposed "twin deficit" in
the U.S. balance of trade or, more exactly,
the current account,"3 is the other side of the
coin of negative foreign investment, that is,
net acquisition by foreigners of claims on the
United States or its residents. If we measure
those claims incorrectly and hence measure
net foreign investment incorrectly, we correspondingly
mis-measure gross saving. By understating
gains in the value of our claims on
foreign assets, we understate business and,
to a certain extent, personal income and
saving.
But here again there is a major difference,
not noted by the public and politicians and,
I must add, not noted by most economists
either, between the official measures and
those that would correspond to meaningful
economic theory.'4 Particularly, direct investment
by U.S. firms abroad and by foreign
firms in the United States are both
taken at original cost. There is then no adjustment
for the changes in value of the
resulting assets in their own currencies or,
taking into account changing exchange rates,
the value of those changes in dollars.
Saving should correspond to increases in
wealth. National saving should correspond
to increases in national claims to wealth, at
home and abroad, net of increasing foreign
claims to domestic wealth. But to be meaningful,
these should surely relate to claims
measured in real, current, or market value.
In fact, they do not. Because they do not, we
have been confronted with repeated assertions
that the United States has become " the
world's greatest debtor nation," which is
"0It should be clear, of course, that this, meaningful
measure of real interest, which involves subtracting the
loss in the real value of debt due to inflation, cannot be
gotten by simply dividing nominal interest by a price
deflator. Deflators have rather to be applied to successive
nominal values of debt to calculate changes in its
real value. These changes are reflated to current prices
and subtracted from nominal interest payments. Alternatively,
the rate of inflation may be subtracted from
nominal rates of interest to calculate real rates of inter-
est which are in turn multiplied by the nominal value of
debt. This last measure, however, will not capture the
current gains or losses in the market value of debt
associated with changing expectations of future interest
rates.
" Using Office of Management and Budget data (U.S.
Government, 1988), I estimate the first adjustment, the
excess of federal investment expenditures over corresponding
capital consumption allowances, at about $70
billion. With an inflation rate of 3.6 percent and federal
debt held by the public at some $2,000 billion, the
second comes to another $72 billion. The federal budget
for fiscal 1988 is thus moved from its reported deficit of
$155 billion to a virtual balance!
12The second, inflation tax adjustment would also
reduce the measure of government dis-saving, or increase
government saving, but would correspondingly
decrease private saving or increase net foreign investment.
To the extent, because foreigners own some U.S.
government debt, our real obligations to the rest of the
world are reduced and properly measured net foreign
investment (as explained below) is increased, the inflation
tax adjustment also adds to gross saving.
'3Which adds to the trade deficit the net payments to
foreigners of property income, interest on government
debt, and transfers.
This despite some warning by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. See, in particular, Jack Bame (1985).