inflicts a double whammy on the economy
in that it both extracts income from the
stream of purchasing power and reduces the
recycling of savings through investment. If
imposed on a revenue-neutral basis it causes
unemployment, while if a budgetary adjustment
is made to maintain employment constant,
its burden can be thought of as falling
on future wage earners, who will have less
capital with which to work.
Problems of the deferral of income
through undistributed profits, as well as the
deferral of taxation to the time of realization
of capital gains, would ideally be met
by putting the personal income tax on a
cumulative basis, along lines I developed
while working with Carl Shoup in 1938,
whereby the deferral of the reporting of
income, by whatever means, merely involves
the borrowing of the deferred tax at a suitable
rate of interest. About two-thirds of
the internal revenue code would become
redundant, with the possible exception of
the need to deal with the international jet
set and revolving-door marriages; large
numbers of tax techies would be able to
apply themselves to more productive employment.

Failing this, an approximation to a level
playing field might be had by imposing a
small annual tax on the accumulated undistributed
surplus of corporations, roughly
equal to the interest on the stockholders'
postponed individual income tax. Similarly,
there should be a surcharge on realized
capital gains, proportionate to the length of
time held, to offset the gain from the deferral
of the tax.
If there is nevertheless a need to cater to
a political demand for something that can
be labeled a corporation tax, this might be
satisfied by levying a corporation tax on
dividends, interest, and retained earnings at
a rate corresponding to the first-bracket rate
of the individual income tax and exempting
such interest and dividends from this "normal"
rate, going back to the pre-1934 practice
of dividing the income tax into a normal
tax and a progressive surtax. To even things
up neatly, normal tax paid on other forms of
income should be deductible in computing
the base for the progressive surtax paid by a
minority of taxpayers. It would still be appropriate
to have an undistributed surplus
tax to correspond to this surtax.
IV. Tax-Exempt Bonds
Another measure that might slightly improve
investment allocation would be to replace
the exemption of interest on state and
local bonds by a taxable tax credit at a rate
that would maintain the market value of the
bonds. Low-bracket taxpayers would be little
affected, while the entire loss of revenue
to the Treasury would accrue as a subsidy to
the issuers. Upper-bracket taxpayers would
no longer have an incentive to invest in such
bonds rather than in riskier investments
more suitable to their status.
V. Taxing Imputed Income
A more important but politically more
difficult measure would be to require the
inclusion in taxable income of the rental
value of owner-occupied residences. This
would not only improve the equity and progressivity
of the income tax but go a substantial
way toward making more units
available for rental and, to a modest extent,
promoting the construction of additional
affordable rental housing and abating the
problem of homelessness. A similar case
can be made for including in the income tax
base a net rental value of nonbusiness automobiles
(equal to interest on the market
value of the car), in this case reducing the
discrimination against the use of public
transit.
VI. Shifting Property Taxes from
Improvements to Land
A measure that could provide a powerful
stimulus to investment in property improvements
would be to replace part or all of the
property tax by a tax on land value only, a
proposal that can be traced all the way back
to Franqois Quesnay and the French physiocrats
but which is more recently associated
with the name of Henry George. This