questions. Just what is social insurance? Why
do, or should, we have such programs? And
what are the principles by which such programs
should be evaluated and redesigned?
I. Social Insurance and Welfare Programs
The word "insurance" is used to describe
these transfer programs because they deal with
risks: the risk of job loss, of health care expenses,
and of inadequate assets during retirement.
But social insurance is very different
from private insurance. The key distinction is
that participation in social insurance programs
is mandatory or is induced by substantial fiscal
subsidies.

Social insurance programs are also very different
from welfare programs. Welfare benefits
are means tested, i.e., they are paid only to those
with incomes (and assets) below some level. In
the United States, these means-tested programs
include Medicaid, food stamps, subsidized
housing, school lunches, and others.2 In contrast,
social insurance programs are "event conditioned.
" Benefits are paid when some event
occurs in an individual's life regardless of the
individual's income or assets. Unemployment
benefits are paid to those who lose their jobs and
Medicare benefits to those who are ill and over
65. Social Security benefits are available to
those over age 62, disability benefits to those
unable to work, and survivor benefits to the
widows and children of deceased workers.
Unlike welfare programs, social insurance
programs are not designed to be vehicles for
income redistribution. Although some fraction
of social insurance outlays is paid to those with
low incomes, most of the benefits go to middleand
higher-income households. This is particularly
true in the United States, where cash benefits
to retirees and the unemployed are positively
related to previous earnings and where health care
is provided by private hospitals and physicians,
even when financed by social insurance.
Social insurance may appear to be redistributing
income to the poor because benefits are
paid to those who are temporarily poor due to
the event that triggered the payment of benefits.
This ignores the permanent or lifetime income
of these recipients. It also ignores the effect of
the social insurance on the incentive to accumulate
funds for these rainy days. Social Security
benefits that replace 50 percent or more of
after-tax pre-retirement income reduce significantly
the incentive to save for old age and
therefore depress income in retirement. Unemployment
benefits with high replacement rates
have a similar effect on saving to finance spells
of unemployment.

The lack of redistribution is well illustrated
by the Social Security retirement program. Last
year, a new retiree who had annual earnings at
or above the Social Security program maximum
taxable amount ($87,900 in 2004) for at least 35
years received a benefit of $21,900. In contrast,
someone with lifetime earnings in the middle of
the earnings distribution received only about
two-thirds as much in retirement benefits. And
someone with low earnings (i.e., 45 percent of
the average wage) received benefits of less than
$9,000 a year. This lack of redistribution is
compounded by the rules governing benefits to
spouses and widows. A retiree who previously
had maximum taxable income and who retired
with a dependent spouse received more than
$32,000 a year from Social Security, while the
widow of a low-income earner would receive
less than $9,000 a year.

The Social Security program appears to be
redistributive because everyone pays the same
tax rate, while the ratio of benefits to lifetime
earnings is designed to fall as those earnings
rise. In practice, however, this apparent redistribution
is offset by the longer expected life of
higher-income individuals, their increased use
of spousal benefits, and the later age at which
they begin to work and to pay taxes. Research
by Jeffrey Liebman (2002), based on a large
sample of actual individual earnings histories,
showed that less than 10 percent of Social Security
benefits represented net redistribution
across income groups within the same birth
cohort. Julia Lynn Coronado et al. (2000)
showed that the combination of taxes and benefits
for the Social Security program leaves the
lifetime Gini coefficient of the population's income
essentially unchanged. In addition, the
general equilibrium effects of Social Security
tilt the pretax distribution of income toward
higher income individuals by reducing capital
accumulation, which in turn lowers real wages
and raises the return to capital.