avoided altogether or even that they will be
promptly recognized; and while errors persist,
they will result in some inflationary (or deflationary)
pressures. But the growing inflation to
which Friedman refers is, to repeat, a crawl not a
gallop. One may usefully recall in this connection
the experience of 1965-70 referred to earlier,
with the further remark that the existence of
excess employment was quite generally recognized
at the time, and failure to eliminate it
resulted overwhelmingly from political considerations
and not from a wrong diagnosis.3
There remains then only the empirical issue:
have stabilization policies worked in the past and
will they work in the future? Monetarists think
the answer is negative and suggest, as we have
seen, that misguided attempts at stabilization,
especially through monetary policies, are responsible
for much of the observed instability.
The main piece of evidence in support of this
contention is the Great Depression, an episode
well documented through the painstaking work
of Friedman and Anna Schwartz, although still
the object of dispute (see, for example, Peter
Temin). But in any event, that episode while it
may attest to the power of money, is irrelevant
for present purposes since the contraction of the
money supply was certainly not part of a comprehensive
stabilization program in the postKeynesian
sense.
When we come to the relevant postwar period,
the problem of establishing the success or failure
of stabilization policies is an extremely taxing
one. Many attempts have been made at developing
precise objective tests, but in my view,
none of these is of much value, even though I am
guilty of having contributed to them in one of my
worst papers (1964). Even the most ingenious
test, that suggested by Victor Argy, and relying
on a comparison of the variability of income with
that of the velocity of circulation, turns out to
be valid only under highly unrealistic restrictive
assumptions.
Dennis Starleaf and Richard Floyd have proposed
testing the effectiveness of stabilization by
comparing the stability of money growth with
that of income growth, much as I have done
above for the United States, except that they
apply their test to a cross section of industrialized
countries. They found that for a sample of
13 countries, the association was distinctly
positive. But this test is again of little value. For
while a negative association for a given country,
such as suggested by my U.S. test, does provide
some weak indication that monetary activism
helped rather than hindered, the finding of a
positive association across countries proves
absolutely nothing. It can be readily shown, in
fact, that, to the extent that differential variability
of income reflects differences in the character
of the shocks-a most likely circumstance for
their sample-successful stabilization also
implies a positive correlation between the variability
of income and that of money.
But though the search for unambiguous quantitative
tests has so far yielded a meager crop,
there exists a different kind of evidence in favor
of Keynesian stabilization policies which is
impressive, even if hard to quantify. To quote
one of the founding fathers of business cycle
analysis, Arthur Burns, writing in 1959, "Since
1937 we have had five recessions, the longest of
which lasted only 13 months. There is no parallel
for such a sequence of mild-or such a sequence
of brief-contractions, at least during the past
hundred years in our country" (p. 2). By
now we can add to that list the recessions of
1961 and 1970.
There is, furthermore, evidence that very
similar conclusions hold for other industrialized
countries which have made use of stabilization
policies; at any rate that was the prevailing view
among participants to an international conference
held in 1967 on the subject, "Is the busi-
3Friedman's logical argument against stabilization policies
and in favor of a constant money growth rule is, I  submit, much like arguing to a man from St. Paul wishing to
go to New Orleans on important business that he would be a
fool to drive and should instead get himself a tub and drift
down the Mississippi: that way he can be pretty sure that the  current will eventually get him to his destination; whereas, if  he drives, he might make a wrong turn and, before he notices
he will be going further and further away from his destination
and pretty soon he may end up in Alaska, where he will
surely catch pneumonia and he may never get to New
Orleans!