The title of my address implicitly assumes
that economics is itself one of the sciences.
I believe that to be so, and intend as I go on
to indicate more fully in what sense I hold
that view. However, my principal aim in
choosing my topic is not that of claiming
any particular status for economic analysis.
Rather, I want to share with you some observations
I have made over the last six
years as a result of involvement in various
interdisciplinary studies, through reading
the reports of other such studies, or discussing
them with colleagues in various
fields of science.

With increasing frequency natural and
social scientists are indeed finding themselves
thrown together in the study of new
problems that are of great practical importance
for society, and essentially interdisciplinary
in character. Prominent among
these are problems of environmental policy,
such as the protection of air and water
quality. Another class of problems concerns
a desirable long-range mix of technologies
of energy supply, conversion and use. These
two classes of problems overlap, for instance,
with respect to the disposal of nuclear
wastes, heat rejection to the environment,
and in the case of fossil fuels the
as yet poorly understood global and regional
effects of sustained large releases of
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Assembled in pursuit of such studies, our
interdisciplinary group soon finds that its
diverse participants ask different questions;
use different concepts; use different terms
for the same concept and the same term
with different meanings; explicitly or implicitly
make different assumptions; and
perceive different opportunities for empirical
verification which may lead them
to apply different methods to that end. The
result can be politely concealed bewilderment,
possibly a suppressed surge of "weand-
they" feeling, in the worst case a growing
mistrust that only time and sustained
interaction can overcome.
I shall try to illustrate the difficulties of
such interaction by a few examples from recent
studies involving, besides economics,
mostly the natural sciences and engineering.
Limitations of experience, background, and
time have compelled me to omit examples
involving a strong participation from the
other social sciences. Had my guide, mentor,
and dear friend Jacob Marschak lived
to give this address, and had he chosen a
similar topic, the social sciences would have
received an emphasis reflecting their importance
to the problems of contemporary society.
The writings Marschak left us, and
the program and the Proceedings of last
year's meeting of the American Economic
Association, stand together as a monument
to his awareness and vision of the
actual and potential contributions of the
social and behavioral sciences.
To prepare for the task I have set myself,
I have requested and obtained interviews
with a somewhat casually selected sample
of natural scientists and engineers, and with
a few colleagues in economics. Their responses
have been drawn on in the preparation
of this address, without attribution by
name. I here express my, and indeed our,
indebtedness for the help we have been
given. Later on, I will cite some statements
verbatim.

Table 1 can serve as a two-dimensional
table of contents for my discussion. Three
topics of study are listed on the left. On
each of the three topics a recent study has