low-income economies the crude death rate de-
clined 31.5 percent while the crude birth rate
declined 14.4 percent (China excluded) (World
Bank, 1980). The annual population growth rate
for the same countries was 2.5 percent for
1960-1970 and 2.2 percent for 1970-1978
(World Bank, 1980).
Why has fertility declined as real per capita
incomes have increased? At low levels of in-
come, with agriculture as the major occupation,
children have a positive benefit in increasing the
level of income of the parents as well as pro-
viding security against illness and old age. Chil-
dren, and their growth and development, enter
into the utility functions of parents positively.
Parents realize satisfaction both in terms of the
quantity and quality of their children (Becker,
1991). As real per capita incomes increase, the
structure of the benefits from children change.
The direct contribution of children to the in-
come and material welfare of their parents di-
minishes and in urban communities becomes
negative; even in agricultural communities
where incomes and the level of mechanization
are high, children make modest contributions to
current incomes and fertility in rural and urban
areas in the United States are now the same.
However, the utility that parents derive from
their children's growth and development in-
creases as their incomes increase and the em-
phasis on the quality is reflected in increased
investment in their children. Children have in-
creasingly become a consumption good as real
per capita incomes have increased. Thus the
desired number of children is negatively related
to real income and as contraceptive knowledge
and technology have improved, families now
have the ability to achieve the number of chil-
dren desired to a greater degree and at lower
cost than in decades past.
VIII. Why the Nineteenth Century Had Lower
Population Growth
The differences in the population growth
rates between Europe in the nineteenth century
and in the developing countries in the twentieth
century are very great. During the first half of
the nineteenth century, the annual growth rate
for Europe (excluding Russia) was 0.55 percent;
from 1850 to 1880, 0.60, and for the last two
decades, 0.80 percent. The annual rate of in-
crease for the developing regions for 1950 to
1995 was 2.0 percent. In 1900 Europe's popu-
lation (excluding Russia) was 285 million. If
Europe's population during the nineteenth cen-
tury had grown at the developing countries' rate
from 1950 to 1995, its population would have
exceeded a billion in 1900, more than three
times its actual population. Could Europe have
accommodated such a large population in 1900
without a significant reduction in its real per
capita income at the end of the century? Obvi-
ously we will never know, but it seems very
unlikely that it could have unless many of the
technological developments of the twentieth
century had occurred much, much earlier. While
it was true that the rate of economic growth, as
measured by changes in real GDP per capita,
was much slower in Europe in the nineteenth
century than in the developing countries in the
twentieth century (Maddison, 1995), it is worth
exploring why population growth was relatively
slow in Europe.
One factor responsible for the slow growth of
population in Europe was the significant in-
crease in the percentage of the population living
in cities-in 1800 the percentage was 12.1 and
in 1900 it was 37.9. Throughout the nineteenth
century, cities had much higher rates of mortal-
ity than rural areas. Migration from rural areas
was the source of the growth of cities. Not only
did death rates in cities exceed birth rates, but
their death rates were significantly higher than
in rural areas.
Bairoch (1988 p. 230) reports that in Western
Europe throughout the nineteenth century infant
mortality rates in urban areas exceeded the rates
in rural areas by 30 to 60 percent. In Sweden in
the early nineteenth century infant deaths ac-
counted for approximately 25 percent of all
deaths (Keyfitz and Flieger, 1968). But the dif-
ference in mortality was not confined to infants;
life expectancy at age 15 in Sweden was more
than four years higher in rural than in urban
areas in 1881-1890 (Bairoch, 1988 p. 235).8