great economy in the handling of information,
presumably because transmission of
prices is in some significant sense much
cheaper than transmission of the whole set
of production possibilities and utility
functions. It is this point which emerged
in the great debate over the feasibility of
socialism begun by Ludwig von iMises's
attack and usually thought of as concluding
with the work of Oskar Lange and
Abba Lerner in the 1930's; though it should
be added many of the essential points had
already been made earlier by Vilf redo
Pareto and Enrico Barone. XVhat was argued,
in effect, was that a socialist system
could use the price system and therefore
achieve whatever economies in information
it does achieve; and if the equilibrium
conditions are written out they do give the
appearance of relative simplicity. But
what was left obscure is a more definite
measure of information and its costs, in
terms of which it would be possible to assert
the superiority of the price system
over a centralized alternative. Though I
feel that current work has brought about a
considerable clarification, we still have no
definite measure. Indeed, in some respects,
more recent developments have made the
answers less clear. Several writers, in both
Western and socialist countries, have noted
that alternative decentralized schemes
exist where quantity messages rather than
price messages are transmitted in the successive
stages of approximation and that
such schemes also have efficient equilibrium
points. Indeed, with the development of
mathematical programming and highspeed
computers, the centralized alternative
no longer appears preposterous. After
all, it would appear that one could mimic
the workings of a decentralized system by
an appropriately chosen centralized algorithm.
While there is more to the story
than these few remarks, they do make the
point that if we are going to take informational
economy seriously, we have to add
to our usual economic calculations an appropriate
measure of the costs of information
gathering and transmission.
But actually the comparisons between
socialist and capitalist resource allocation
systems have tended to overlook some of
the most obvious facts while examining
finer points closely. As we all know, both
production and consumption (lecisions are
in fact made with reference to the future
as well as to the present. A rational production
plan includes very importantly decisions
or at least plans about the future; and
similarlv with consumption plans. Investment
and savings are not only integral
parts of our current decisions but in the
long run shape the possibilities for further
development. As we know, the formal neoclassical
model can be extenided to decisions
over time by dating commodities and
regarding the same commodity at different
dates as different commodities. All previous
conclusions follow; allocative efficiency,
for example, is achieved with the
same appearance of informational efliciency.
But of course there is a slight problem
with this reasoning. The information
about future commodities needed includes
their prices. These prices must be those
found on a suitable market, one in which
future supply and future demand are
equated. Unfortunately, no such markets
exist. Even the futures markets in certain
commodities, limited in extent as they are,
do not in fact lead to balancing all future
decisions. Rather they balance present
commitments to the future; but it is understood
by all parties that when the future
becomes the present, there will be a
spot market on which the futures commitments
may be undone; and indeed those
making no futures commitments at all can
enter and know now that they will be able
to enter.
Even as a graduate student, I was somewhat
surprised at the emphasis on static
allocative efficiency by market socialists,