PG _ 2(z)
Ph2t ./
phI B I/0
A F 0'(z) H _(
Ph2 D .............O E
P12 7 O"(Z)
4 4 ~ ~I I I I I
ZI Z1 2 Zb I ZLI Zh2' z
FIGURE 2. TIME-SERIES EFFECTS
innovations that extend the quality range of
goods tend to reduce the real costs of services
and reduce living costs for those who buy them.
Productivity-improving quality changes generally
reduce the real prices of goods. Prices and
available qualities are always changing. Some
sellers are innovating and attempting to increase
profits by extending the desirable characteristics
in their goods and reducing prices below those
of competitors. The prototypical example appears
in Figure 2. The first-period equilibrium is
the same as before, where goods are labeled zll
and Zh I and equilibria are found at points A and
B. In the second period the attributes of goods
have changed to Z12 and Zh2 so the price-quality
locus has moved down, and the average price
per unit quality has declined. (A ray from the
origin through A is steeper than one through D
and similarly for B and E.) Quality-adjusted
price indexes require measuring the distance
between the two price-quality loci, shown in
Figure 2 as the curve that connects A and B and
the one that connects D and E. The distance
between F and D is a measure of the qualityadjusted
change in price at quality level z,12
When technical change is so large that z could
not be produced in period 1 (a 32-bit computer
chip did not exist in 1980) shown, for example,
by Zh2', direct price comparisons of the improved
product are impossible. In principle this
can be overcome with sufficient structural
knowledge of bid functions. In this case, the
requirement amounts to knowing the exact
shape of 02( z) and of 02'( z), which represents
different indifference curves for the same consumer.
The conceptually appropriate measure of
distance is the difference between actual price
in period 2 and what type 2 buyers would have
been willing to pay for Zh2' in period 1 had it
been available, shown in Figure 2 as the distance
between G and H. Generally such detailed
structural knowledge is unavailable, so distance
must be measured by using overlapping varieties
whose quality is more or less comparable
across adjacent periods. For example, top-ofthe-
line goods in period 1 might be compared
with bottom-of-the-line goods in period 2.
Longer period comparisons are made by linking
or chaining indexes with common components
over the years.
Figure 2 contains a graphic example of why
these adjustments are important. Consider a
new good Zh2' not previously available, whose
current price, Ph2', exceeds that of the best prior
models. Unadjusted indexes would show rising
prices simply because Ph2' exceeds Ph 1. A more
accurate distance-based quality-adjusted index
would correctly show prices declining because
consumers would have been willing to pay more
than its period 2 cost in period 1, had it been
available. Note that there is a consumer whose
bid function, in this case 03( z), reflects higher
satisfaction at (Zh2', Ph2') than at any other
available (z, p) combination.
This example is transparent, but very relevant.
Until a few years ago, the National Income
and Product Accounts priced computers by the
box-by the package in which producers delivered
them. In the early years of the computer
revolution boxes were getting bigger and more
powerful, and their prices were increasing. It
was as if soap were suddenly produced in bigger
bars and the index used the price per bar, not the
price per unit volume or weight. Computer productivity
was grossly distorted in the official
indexes, though the aggregate consequences of
the error were limited because investment in
computers was not such a large share of total
investment as is true today. But even when box
prices were falling, as has been true for many
years, unadjusted price indexes distort productivity.
Prices are really falling much faster than
appears because products are improving so
much. The mainframe of yesterday is the laptop
of today. Considering that computers currently
make up almost half of gross business investment,
eliminating these biases is important for