increase of prices. For continiuing inflation,
the textbooks tol(I us, a necessary and
sufficient conditioin was an inflationary
gap, real aggregate (lemand in excess of
feasible supply. T he modlel was tailormade
for wartime inflation.
Postwar experience destroyed the identification
of full employmeint with the
economy's inflation threshold. The profession,
the press, andI the public discovered
the "new inflation" of the 1950's, inflation
without beniefit of gap), labelled but
scarcely illuminated by the term "costpush.
" Subsequently the view of the world
suggested by the Phillips curve merged
demand-pull and cost-push inflation and
blurred the distinction between them.
This view containe(d no concept of full employment.
In its place came the tradeoff,
along which society supposedly can choose
the least undesirable feasible combination
of the evils of unemployment and inflation.
Many economists deny the existence of
a durable Phillips tradeoff. TIheir numbers
and influence are increasing. Some of them
contendl that there is only one rate of
unemployment compatible with steady
inflation, a "natural rate" consistent with
any steadly rate of change of prices, positive,
zero, or negative. The natural rate is
another full employment candidate, a
policy target at least in the passive sense
that monetary and fiscal policy makers
are advised to eschew any numerical unemployment
goal and to let the economy
gravitate to this equilibrium. So we have
come full circle. Full employment is once
again nothing but the equilibrium reached
by labor markets unaidedl andl undlistorted
by governmental fine tuning.
In discussing these issues, I shall make
the following points. First, an observed
amount of unemployment is not revealed
to be voluntary simply by the fact that
money wage rates are constant, or rising,
or even accelerating. I shall recall and extend
Keynes's dlefinition of involuntary
unemployment and his explanation why
workers may accept price inflation as a
method of re(lucing real wages while rejecting
money wage cuts. The second
point is related. Involuntary unemployment
is a disequilibrium phenomenon;
the behavior, the persistence, of excess
supplies of labor depend on how and how
fast markets adjust to shocks, and on how
large and how frequent the shocks are.
Higher prices or faster inflation can
(liminish involuntary, disequilibrium unemployment,
even though voluntary, eqluilibrium
labor supply is entirely free of
money illusion.
Third, various criteria of full employment
coincide in a theoretical full stationary
eqjuilibrium, but diverge in persistent
disequilibrium. These are 1) the
natural rate of unemployment, the rate
compatible with zero or some other constant
inflation rate, 2) zero involuntary
unemployment, 3) the rate of unemployment
needed for optimal job search and
placement, and 4) unemployment equal
to job vacancies. The first criterion dictates
higher unemployment than any of
the rest. Instead of commending the natural
rate as a target of employment policy,
the other three criteria suggest less unemployment
and more inflation. Therefore,
fourth, there are real gains from additional
employment, which must be
weighed in the social balance against the
costs of inflation. I shall conclude with a
few remarks on this choice, and on the
possibilities of improving the terms of the
tradeoff.
II. Keynesian and Classical Interpretations
of Unemployment
To begin with the General Theory is not
just the ritual piety economists of my
generation owe the book that shaped their
minds. Keynes's treatment of labor market
equilibrium and disequilibrium in his
first chapter is remarkably relevant today.