nations is usually taken for granted and left
unexplored, but the consequences are not.
Albert Hirschman (1970), for example, makes
a distinction between voice and exit: voice
-speaking up and trying to persuade-being
the appropriate action when one disagrees
with the course followed by a group to which
one belongs; and exit-resigning or refusal
to buy the good or service-as a response to
what one dislikes in the market. Adam Smith
minimizes the difference between families and
strangers, suggesting that affection is little
more than habitual sympathy produced by
propinquity; despite the greater thickness of
blood than water, he claims that siblings
educated at distances from one another experience
a diminution of affection (1759 (1808)
II, pp. 68-70). In arguing against Walzer's
view that countries owe immigrants the right
to become citizens, Judith Lichtenberg (1981)
echoes Smith's view in saying that the crucial
difference between members and strangers
lies between those with whom one has faceto-
face contact and those with whom one
does not. An accident that kills someone in
one's town or a neighboring community is
likely to be more moving than a catastrophe
at the other end of the world in which
hundreds or thousands die. Adam Smith goes
further, comparing the loss of a little finger
with a catastrophe that swallowed up
China: ". . . if he lost his little finger he could
not sleep, but for China he can snore... provided
he has never seen them" (ibid., I, p.
317).
Some years ago in a book on the brain
drain, Harry Johnson (1968) argued in favor
of a cosmopolitan solution, encouraging
emigration, and Don Patinkin (1968) for a
national one. In discussing the Bhagwati
scheme for taxing professional emigrants
earning more abroad than at home, for the
benefit of the poor sending country-saying
this was akin to paying alimony in a divorce
case for breaking a social taboo-I suggested
(1977) that the Johnson position was equivalent
to saying that a person should go where
he or she could earn the highest return, while
Patinkin said that people should stay where
they belonged. Patinkin chided me privately
for this interpretation, and it is admittedly
oversimplified. But the difference between
the Johnson and the Patinkin positions, both
emanating from Chicago, suggests the line
between market and nonmarket areas in economics
is shadowy.
In writing about the multinational corporation,
I have from time to time suggested
that host countries resist the intrusion of
strangers because "...man in his elemental
state is a peasant with a possessive love of
his own turf; a mercantilist who favors exports
over imports; a Populist who distrusts
banks, especially foreign banks; a monopolist
who abhors competition; a xenophobe
who feels threatened by strangers
and foreigners" (1984, p. 39), usually adding
that it is the task of international economics
to extirpate these primitive instincts and to
teach cosmopolitanism. The fact that some
of these reactions remain at a late stage in
the educational process can be tested by the
device of asking students on examinations,
seriatim, a series of questions:
Do you advocate free trade, or at least is
there a strong presumption in its favor?
Do you advocate the free international
movement of portfolio capital?
... of corporate capital in foreign direct
investment?
... free migration of students and professional
labor?
... immigration of relatives of persons
permanently resident in this country?
... free migration for all?
(It is desirable to feed these questions to the
victims one at a time, without revealing the
whole list before the first answer is given,
and to take up the replies to the first questions
so that there is no chance to go back
and amend early answers.) There will be
sophisticated answers expatiating on the second,
third, and fourth-best if the marginal
conditions for a Pareto optimal solution are
not met, and I would particularly excuse a
James Meade (1955) solution that would limit
immigration from countries that have not
accomplished their Malthusian revolution, on
the ground that their emigrants will be replaced,
so that free immigration will reduce
world income per capita, if not world income
as a whole. Most economists and noneconomists
alike would agree, however, that
goods are less intrusive than money, money