models), the depiction of actual conduct
and choices?
Another issue, related to individual behavior
and rationality, concerns the role of
social interactions in the development of
values, and also the connection between
value formation and the decision-making
processes. Social choice theory has tended
to avoid this issue, following Arrow's own
abstinence: "we will also assume in the present
study that individual values are taken
as data and are not capable of being altered
by the nature of the decision process itself"
(Arrow, 1951 p. 7).5 On this subject,
Buchanan has taken a more permissive position-
indeed emphatically so: "The definition
of democracy as 'government by discussion'
implies that individual values can
and do change in the process of decisionmaking"
(Buchanan, 1954a p. 120).6 We
have to scrutinize the importance of this
difference as well.
This is a long and somewhat exacting list,
but the different issues relate to each other,
and I shall try to examine them briefly and
also comment on some of their practical
implications.
II. Social Welfare Judgments and Arrow's
Impossibility Theorem
The subject of welfare economics was
dominated for a long time by the utilitarian
tradition, which performs interpersonal aggregation
through the device of looking at
the sum-total of the utilities of all the people
involved. By the 1930's, however,
economists came to be persuaded by arguments
presented by Lionel Robbins (1938)
and others (influenced by the philosophy of
"logical positivism") that interpersonal
comparisons of utility had no scientific
basis.7 Thus, the epistemic foundations of
utilitarian welfare economics were seen as
incurably defective.
Because of the eschewal of interpersonal
comparability of individual utilities, the
"new welfare economics" that emerged tried
to rely only on one basic criterion of social
improvement, the Pareto criterion. Since
this confines the recognition of a social improvement
only to the case in which everyone'
s utility goes up (or someone's goes up
and no one's goes down), it does not require
any interpersonal comparison, nor for that
matter, any cardinality of individual utilities.
However, Pareto efficiency can scarcely
be an adequate condition for a good society.
It is quite insensitive to the distribution of
utilities (including inequalities of happiness
and miseries), and it takes no direct note of
anything other than utilities (such as rights
or freedoms) beyond their indirect role in
generating utilities. There is a need, certainly,
for further criteria for social welfare
judgments.
The demands of orderly, overall judgments
of "social welfare" (or the general
goodness of states of affairs) were clarified
by Abram Bergson (1938, 1966) and extensively
explored by Paul Samuelson (1947).
The concentration was on the need for a
real-valued function W of "social welfare"
defined over all the alternative social states,
or at least an aggregate ordering R over
them, the so-called "social preference." In
the reexamination that followed the Bergson-
Samuelson initiative (including the development
of social choice theory as a discipline)
, the search for principles underlying a
social welfare function played a prominent
part.
Arrow (1951) defined a "social welfare
function" as a functional relation that specifies
a social ordering R over all the social
states for every set of individual preference
orderings. In addition to assuming-not especially
controversially-that there are at