generally construed to be a national and
international calamity.
Calamity or not, despite the official figures
which, for the end of 1987, show a negative
"international position" of the United States
of $368 billion, in terms of theoretically
meaningful measures the assertions are sim-
ply not true. The market values of direct
investment of the United States abroad, hav-
ing been undertaken generally in the more
distant past, have appreciated much more in
the currencies of the countries in which the
investment took place than has the dollar
value of foreign investment in the United
States. They have gained enormously more
in dollar value from the fall in dollar ex-
change rates since early 1985. Further, the
official accounts take Treasury gold hold-
ings, which are viewed in effect as an offset
to foreign central bank holdings of dollars,
at its old "statutory" value of $42 an ounce,
roughly a tenth of its value at world market
prices. Adjustments for the value of direct
investment and the value of Treasury gold
have been more than sufficient to wipe out
the entire U.S. "debt" to the rest of the
world.'5
It may be argued, with some validity, that
whatever our current net creditor or net
debtor position, continued current account
deficits will increase U.S. liabilities relative
to assets regarding the rest of the world. But
with proper measures even this judgment
must be hedged. If continued current ac-
count deficits are not financed by foreign
central bank intervention, the dollar is likely
to fall further. As it does, the dollar value of
U.S. assets abroad will rise. This suggests an
adjustment to our measure of the current
account deficit if we are to keep it identically
equal to a true capital account surplus that
measures the increase in the value of foreign
capital in the United States net of increases
in the value of U.S. capital in the rest of the
world.
In order of magnitude, the differences be-
tween conventional measures and those
which might relate more closely to relevant
theoretical constructs are frequently major.
My own estimates for a comprehensive " total
incomes system of accounts" (TISA) put net
national product in 1981 at 30 percent more
than its Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
counterpart,'6 and the contrast is even more
striking when we turn to investment. BEA's
real gross private domestic investment in
1981 was less than one quarter of TISA real
gross capital accumulation (exclusive of cap-
ital gains). Where BEA net private domestic
investment was 5.5 percent of BEA net na-
tional product, TISA net domestic capital
accumulation in current dollars was 19.5
percent of TISA net national product.
Similar proportions show up in the mea-
sures of capital stocks. Business nonresiden-
tial structures and equipment, to which so
much attention is usually given on the ground
of its purported contribution to productivity,
amounted to only 11 percent of total TISA
capital, intangible and tangible, land and
"reproducible," in all sectors-government,
households, and nonprofit, as well as busi-
ness. Government and government enter-
prise structures and equipment came to 8
percent of the total, household durables and
residential capital to 13 percent, and the
intangible capital of R&D, education, train-
ing, and health to no less than 48 percent.'7
Intertemporal and international compar-
isons of total saving, investment, and capital