pension. The benefits are financed by a payroll
tax on earnings currently up to about the eightyfifth
percentile of the distribution of wages
($87,900 in 2004). The payroll tax rate devoted
to the Social Security program other than disability
is now 10.6 percent, divided equally
between employers and employees.
Benefits take the form of an annuity that is
indexed to the CPI to retain its real value during
the individual's retirement years. The level of
benefits at retirement depends on the average
wage-indexed earnings of the individual during
his or her highest 35 earning years. The benefit
formula provides higher annual benefits per dollar
of previous earnings at lower earnings levels
than at higher levels. Individuals who retire
before their normal retirement age (now rising
gradually from 65 to 67) receive an actuarially
reduced benefit, while those who retire after
their normal retirement age receive an actuarially
increased benefit.
Couples may collect benefits either on the basis
of their separate earnings records or as 150 percent
of the benefits of the individual with the higher
benefit level. A surviving spouse can receive 100
percent of the benefit of the higher earning spouse.
These rules for spouse benefits have the effect of
causing many women who pay Social Security
taxes to get little or nothing back for their taxes
since their benefits are based on their husbands'
incomes. This is true not only for married women
but also for younger women who expect to marry
and for divorced women and widows who will
also expect to claim benefits based on their former
(or future) husbands' earnings.
I became interested in Social Security as a
graduate student in the 1960s when I realized
that the tests of consumption theory-Friedman'
s work on the permanent income hypothesis
and Modigliani's work on life cycle
saving- completely ignored the role of Social
Security even though it had become the major
source of retiree income. I realized also that the
theory of Social Security's effect on saving was
more complex than a simple displacement of
financial wealth by Social Security. To the extent
that Social Security induces earlier retirement,
it raises the desired level of financial
wealth. The net effect of Social Security on
saving therefore depends on the balance between
the positive induced retirement effect and
the negative wealth displacement effect, an issue
that could be settled only empirically.  My initial time series analysis (Feldstein, 1974)
implied that Social Security "wealth," the present
actuarial value of future Social Security benefits,
significantly reduced personal saving. Reestimating
this equation 22 years later with a corresponding
amount of additional data produced reassuringly
similar results (Feldstein,1996b) The
conclusion that Social Security depresses private
saving was also supported by household data and
cross-country analysis. Other researchers who
looked at this question generally supported the
primary conclusion, although with estimates of
varying magnitudes (Congressional Budget Office,
1998).
This adverse effect of Social Security on saving
is relevant to understanding the significance
of Paul Samuelson's very important 1958 overlapping
generations paper (Samuelson, 1958).
Samuelson showed that a pure pay-as-you-go
Social Security system in an economy without
capital and without technical progress would
generate an implicit rate of return on each generation'
s taxes equal to the rate of growth of the
population. This occurs because the number of
taxpayers is larger by the rate of growth of
population than the number of retirees. If technical
progress is added to this economy, the
implicit return in a pure pay-as-you-go system
is still the rate of growth of the tax base, now
the sum of the growth rate of population and the
growth rate of productivity.
Samuelson noted that this positive rate of return
meant that an unfunded Social Security program
could raise welfare in an economy that has no
capital assets. But what happens when we recognize
that all economies do have capital stocks and
that Social Security transfers act as a substitute for
real capital accumulation? With that more realistic
description, the reduction in the rate of saving
caused by the provision of pay-as-you-go annuities
can cause a reduction in the present value of
all current and future consumption.
To understand why, consider first an oversimplified
textbook economy in which there are no
capital income taxes. Each generation of workers
receives an implicit pay-as-you-go return equal to
the sum of population and productivity growth but
foregoes the larger return equal to the marginal
product of capital. For each such taxpayer generation,
there is, therefore, a cost of having a payas-
you-go Social Security program rather than
providing for retirement consumption by saving
and investing in real assets (or the financial assets