at the KLEM level with separate consideration
of energy, materials, wage, and capital
costs. It must take account of prices of
grains, ferrous metals, nonferrous metals,
coal, crude oil, machinery, textiles, and the
other component prices in an input-output
system. The appropriate amount of detail
is not a fixed matter. It depends on human
capabilities of analysis, machine facilities,
data bases, and other practical considerations,
but it is, in any case, an order of
magnitude greater than contemplated by
mainstream macro model analysis.
From an analytical point of view, what is
being suggested is a full combination of two
systems of thought. the Leontief model and
the Keynesian model. That these two svstems
can be put back-to-back into a single
consistent model, with full feedback between
each part, is now well known, having
been implemented first with the Brookings
Model and later with various generations of
Wharton Models, and more recently by
Dale Jorgenson in a translog mode. A principal
feature of such combined systems is
that they are not based on restrictive assumptions
of the fixed coefficient inputoutput
model, but are generalized to allow
the coefVlcients of production to vary, according
to the variation of relative prices.
The above expression, "full feedback,"
means that the macro model of final demand
and national income generation cannot
be solved, by itself, without also solving
the input-output system for generatin- sector
production flows. Moreover sector
prices cannot be solved without also solving
the macro model simultaneously.
Price formation in individual sectors is
specified in terms of mark-up relations over
unit labor costs. Thus, sector outputs and
labor inputs are needed in order to explain
sector prices. These prices are needed, in
turn, in order to explain final demand
prices. Similarly, sector investment depends
on sector output as well as sector price.
It is for these and similar reasons that final
demand cannot be generated without making
use of the input-output system in order
to generate sector outputs.
At the same time, the input-output system
is driven by final demand; therefore,
the conventional macro demand model
must be used in order to solve the inputoutput
system. These are the specific senses
in which full feedback is used in order to
obtain simultaneous and consistent integration
of the entire supply and demand sides
of the economy.
In terms of the history of economic
thought, the above approach means thinking
in terms of the empirical implementation
of the Walrasian system. Essentially,
Tinbergen implemented the Keynesian system
and Leontief implemented a part of the
Walrasian system. By putting the two together,
with due allowance to Kuznets for
making the data bases of final demand and
national income available, a complete synthesis
of supply and demand in the economy
as a whole can be put together. This
gives the antecedents of what is meant by
modeling supply, taking into account what
is needed from demand models at the same
time.
III. Why Model Supply?
At the time of the Keynesian Revolution,
there was a pervasive deficiency of demand
throughout most of the world. The Keynesian
policy development, building on
that model, did, in my opinion, much good
for the economy of the Western world, enabling
us to come through an expansive era
of more than twenty-five years without a recurrence
of a Great Depression. That does
not mean that this system of thought and
policy formation did its work for all time
in putting the world economy on a stable
footing. It carried the situation only so far,
and undoubtedly underestimated inflation
potentials, leaving us now at the point
where new systems of thought, drawing
more on the supply side, are needed in
order to develop policies that will be able
to deal with the world's contemporary economic
problems; hopefully, policies that
will have as much longevity as the demand
management policies of the last two to three
decades. That should bring us nicely into
the twenty-first century, which is about as
far ahead as we might attempt to look at the
present time.