While Aristotle agreed with Agathon that
even God could not change the past, he did
think that the future was ours to make-by
basing our choices on reasoning. The idea
of using reason to identify and promote
better-or more acceptable-societies, and
to eliminate intolerable deprivations of different
kinds, has powerfully moved people
in the past and continues to do so now. In
this lecture I would like to discuss some
aspects of this question which have received
attention in the recent literature in socialchoice
and public-choice theories. The contemporary
world suffers from many new as
well as old economic problems, including,
among others, the persistence of poverty
and deprivation despite general economic
progress, the occurrence of famines and
more widespread hunger, and threats to our
environment and to the sustainability of the
world in which we live. Rational use of the
opportunities offered by modern science and
technology, in line with our values and ends,
is a powerful challenge today.
I. Problems and Difficulties
How are we to view the demands of rationality
in social decisions? How much guidance
do we get from Aristotle's general
recommendation that choice should be governed
by "desire and reasoning directed to
some end"? There are several deep-seated
difficulties here.
The first problem relates to the question:
whose desires, whose ends? Different persons
have disparate objects and interests,
and as Horace put it, "there are as many
preferences as there are people." Kenneth
Arrow (1951) has shown, through his famous
"General Possibility Theorem" (an
oddly optimistic name for what is more
commonly-and more revealingly-called
Arrow's "impossibility theorem"), that in
trying to obtain an integrated social preference
from diverse individual preferences, it
is not in general possible to satisfy even
some mild-looking conditions that would
seem to reflect elementary demands of reasonableness.
1 Other impossibility results
have also emerged, even without using some
of Arrow's conditions, but involving other
elementary criteria, such as the priority of
individual liberty.2 We have to discuss why
these difficulties arise, and how we can deal
with them. Are the pessimistic conclusions
that some have drawn from them justified?
Can we sensibly make aggregative socialwelfare
judgments? Do procedures for social
decision-making exist that reasonably
respect individual values and preferences?