monopolies and oligopolies, it is argued,
are immune from competition in setting
wages and prices. The unions raise wages
above competitive rates, with little regard
for the unemployed and under-employed
workers knocking at the gates. Perhaps
the unions are seeking a bigger share of
the revenues of the monopolies and
oligopolies with whom they bargain. But
they don't really succeed in that objective,
because the corporations simply pass the
increased labor costs, along with mark-ups,
on to their helpless customers. The remedy,
it is argued, is either atomization of big
business and big labor or strict public
control of their prices and wages.
So simple a diagnosis is vitiated by confusion
between levels and rates of change.
Monopoly power is no doubt responsible
for the relatively high prices and wages of
some sectors. But can the exercise of
monopoly power generate ever-rising price
and wages? Monopolists have no reason
to hold reserves of unexploited power.
But if they did, or if events awarded them
new power, their exploitation of it would
raise their real prices and wages only
temporarily.
Particular episodes of inflation may be
associated with accretions of monopoly
power, or with changes in the strategies
and preferences of those who possess it.
Among the reasons that wages and prices
rose in the face of mass unemployment
after 1933 were NRA codes and other
early New Deal measures to suppress competition,
and the growth of trade union
membership and power under the protection
of new federal legislation. Recently
we have witnessed substantial gains in the
powers of organized public employees.
Unions elsewhere may not have gained
power, but some of them apparently have
changed their objectives in favor of wages
at the expense of employment.
One reason for the popularity of the
monopoly power diagnosis of inflation is
the identification of administered prices
and wages with concentrations of economic
power. When price and wage increases are
the outcomes of visible negotiations and
decisions, it seems obvious that identifiable
firms and unions have the power to affect
the course of inflation. But the fact that
monopolies, oligopolies, and large unions
have discretion does not mean it is invariably
to their advantage to use it to
raise prices and wages. Nor are administered
prices and wages found only in
high concentration sectors. Very few prices
and wages in a modern economy, even in
the more competitive sectors, are determined
in Walrasian auction markets.
No doubt there has been a secular increase
in the prevalence of administered
wages and prices, connected with the relative
decline of agriculture and other sectors
of self-employment. This development
probably has contributed to the
inflationary bias of. the economy, by enlarging
the number of labor markets
where the response of money wages to
excess supply is slower than their response
to excess demand. The decline of agriculture
as a sector of flexible prices and wages
and as an elastic source of industrial labor
is probably an important reason why the
Phillips trade off problem is worse now
than in the 1920's. Sluggishness of response
to excess supply is a feature of
administered prices, whatever the market
structure, but it may be accentuated by
concentration of power per se. For example,
powerful unions, not actually
forced by competition to moderate their
wage demands, may for reasons of internal
politics be slow to respond to unemployment
in their ranks.
VI. Some Reflections on Policy
If the makers of macro-economic policy
could be sure that the zero-inflation rate
of unemployment is natural, voluntary,
and optimal, their lives would be easy.