since any statement can be derived flawlessly
and immediately from that contradiction.
In its mathematical form, economic theory
is open to an efficient scrutiny for logical
errors. The rigor that has been reached
as a consequence is in sharp contrast to the
standards of reasoning that were accepted
in the late 1930's. Few of the articles published
then by Econometrica or by the Review
of Economic Studies would pass the
acid test of removing all their economic
interpretations and letting their mathematical
infrastructure stand on its own. The
greater logical solidity of more recent analyses
has contributed to the rapid contemporary
construction of economic theory. It has
enabled researchers to build on the work of
their predecessors and to accelerate the cumulative
process in which they are participating.


But a Grand Unified Theory will remain
out of the reach of economics, which will
keep appealing to a large collection of individual
theories. Each one of them deals
with a certain range of phenomena that it
attempts to understand and to explain.
When it acquires an axiomatic form, its
explicit assumptions delimit its domain of
applicability and make illegitimate overstepping
of its boundary flagrant. Some of those
theories take a comprehensive view of an
economic system and bring insights into the
solutions of several global problems. For
instance, prices contribute to achieving an
efficient use of resources, to equalizing supply
and demand for commodities, and to
preventing the formation of destabilizing
coalitions. In every case, a theoretical explanation
must be provided. The assumptions,
which cannot be satisfied by all economic
observations, are the present outcome of a
continuing weakening process.
A global view of an economy that wants
to take into account the large number of its
commodities, the equally large number of
its prices, the multitude of its agents, and
their interactions requires a mathematical
model. Economists have successfully constructed
such a model because the central
concept of the quantity of a commodity has
a natural linear structure. The action of an
agent can then be described by listing the
quantity of its input or output for each
commodity (opposite signs differentiating
inputs from outputs). That list can be treated
as the list of the coordinates of a point in
the linear commodity space. Similarly, the
price system of an economy can be treated
as a point in the linear price space, dual of
the commodity space, whose dimension is
also the number of commodities.
In those two linear spaces, the stage was
set for sometimes dazzling mathematical
developments that began with the elements
of differential calculus and linear algebra
and that gradually called on an ever broader
array of powerful techniques and fundamental
results offered by mathematics. Thus,
the three roles of prices given earlier as
instances were illuminated by basic mathematical
theorems: the first, the achievement
of an efficient use of resources, by results of
convex analysis; the second, the equalization
of supply and demand for commodities,
by results of fixed point theory; the third,
the prevention of the formation of destabilizing
coalitions, by results of the theory of
integration and of nonstandard analysis. In
those three cases, the lag between the date
of a mathematical discovery and the date of
its application to economic theory decreased
over time. It was notably short for
nonstandard analysis, founded at the beginning
of the 1960's by Abraham Robinson1
and applied to economics by Donald Brown
and Abraham Robinson (1972).
The last, and most recently developed, of
those three instances can be chosen, as can
either of the other two, for a more detailed
illustration. Competition is perfect when every
agent's influence on the outcome of
economic activity is insignificant. The influence
of their totality on that outcome is,
however, significant. It is to solve the problem
of aggregating negligible quantities so
as to obtain a nonnegligible sum that integration
was invented. In this perspective,
the application of integration theory to the
study of economic competition is entirely
natural. That application requires the set of
agents to be large-larger than the set of
integers. Treating the set of the agents of an
economy as the rich collection of the points