IX. The Need for Direct Inflation Control
Long before the economy reaches a really
satisfactory level of full employment, however,
as employment gets to the NIARU
level, and inflation threatens to accelerate,
the Fed is likely to try to slam on the
brakes, and demands for a more stringent
budget balancing and cutback of "government
waste" are likely to be heard in the
halls of Congress. To get anywhere near a
satisfactory level of unemployment, some
method of dealing with inflation will have to
be devised. We are short of tools.
In effect, the economy can be thought of
as having three major parameters that we
would like to control: the level of employment
of human and other resources, the
price level, and the division of the resulting
total product between provision for current
wants and investment in growth and the
future. At the same time, we have only two
major policy tools: monetary and fiscal policy.
In an era when inflation was not a
threat, one could think of these two tools as
controlling the level of employment and the
rate of growth, with low interest rates combined
with a deficit or surplus sufficient to
maintain full employment leading to high
investment and growth, and conversely.
However, with a need to control inflation as
well, relying on only two dimensions of control
is like trying to fly an airplane without
ailerons, which were the third dimension of
control that was the key to the success of
the Wright brothers. A new tool is needed.
Over the past three decades a number of
proposals for direct control of inflation have
been made, but none has achieved general
acceptance. Wartime control of specific
prices, accompanied by rationing, was accepted
as an emergency measure and
worked in part because of patriotic willingness
to conform and in part because, being
temporary, past prices could be continued
without becoming absurd. As a permanent
scheme this is probably unworkable
and certainly unacceptable. More recent
schemes have involved tax incentives of
various kinds to provide a countervailing
downward pressure against the inherent
inflationary tendency of an imperfectly
competitive system. Such schemes have
generally suffered from difficulties in measuring
price changes at an individual-firm
level, capriciousness of results when tied to
such taxes as the corporation income tax,
and possible time lags in adjusting the
strength of the incentives to changing circumstances.


X. Market-Based Inflation-Control Plans
A few years ago David Colander came to
visit me and reported on a proposal by
Abba Lerner for a market in rights to raise
prices. Those wishing to raise their prices
would be required to purchase the right
from those prepared to lower their prices,
thus assuring a constant overall price level.
While this neatly circumvents the problem
of adjusting the strength of incentive to
changing inflationary pressures, the problem
remains of how to measure price
changes in the face of quality changes, new
products, and variations in the terms of sale
such as delivery, reliability, service, credit
terms, tie-in sales, and the like.
More pregnant was the question of how
to deal with cases in which prices paid to
suppliers have risen. A somewhat similar
problem arises with gross receipts taxes,
which discriminate in favor of vertically integrated
operations and against situations in
which the product passes through several
hands on the way to the market. In Europe
this problem has been solved by shifting
from gross receipts taxes and retail sales
taxes to value-added taxes, which immediately
suggests that instead of a market in
rights to raise prices we have a market in
rights to value added.

XI. Control with Marketable Gross
Markup Warrants

For semantic reasons I have chosen to
speak in terms of "gross markups" rather
than value added, as being more suggestive
of something to be restrained rather than
promoted. In principle, gross markups simply
refers to the excess of sales revenue over
amounts paid for nonprime inputs. In operation,
warrants for gross markups for a