the intensive study of a single molecule would
be an all-but-worthless anecdote. In the case of
DNA, we know that the exact opposite is true:
because DNA is a template that determines all
of the cells of the organism, and also its reproduction,
one molecule may not tell all, but it
does tell a great deal. Form follows function.
Is there some reason to believe that economic
behavior and economic units are any different?
Economic decisions may not be as duplicable as
biological processes, but the basic reason why
science intensively studies the microscopic applies
to economics as well. The individual economic
unit, be it a firm, a consumer, or an
employee, behaves the way it doesfor a reason.
And if these actors behave as they do for a
reason, we can expect to find those reasons from
the structures that we see in close observation;
and because of those structures their behavior
will also tend to be duplicated. This duality
between duplicability and structure explains
why much of science concerns very close observation,
as it also explains why the study of
even a single part of a single DNA molecule
will be revealing.

Standard economic methodology says that
it is impossible to infer motivation of individual
actors from intensive case studies. Anthropologists
and sociologists listen carefully
to individuals in such studies. When people
follow the norms, they use them to explain
their actions; when, on the other hand, they
violate the norms, they become the subject of
local gossip. Those case studies are revealing
because-like a language, which dictates how
one should speak-the norms are common
knowledge. In this lecture, we have seen one
prominent example of the use of such knowledge:
Bewley's interviews uncovered the
common understanding of the norms regarding
wage cuts among Connecticut employers
in the early 1990s.

Summary. -Positive economics systematically
denies that norms can be understood from
intensive case study. Precedence given to models
without norms because they are by definition
more parsimonious and statistical tests of low
power then jointly create a firewall against consideration
that norms play a role in determining
behavior. For these reasons, current economic
methodology inherently has created a biased
economics. In contrast, a more naturalistic approach
would prescribe a different methodology.
In this case, economists would observe
decision makers as closely as possible, with the
express intent of characterizing their motivation,
and would use such characterization as the
basis for modeling of economic structure. Indeed,
sociological and anthropological ethnographers
do precisely that: they depict their
subjects' motivation from close observation.
X. Endogeneity of Norms

It is now time to discuss the endogeneity of
the norms. There is a special reason for its
consideration. Robert Lucas discovered that,
with endogenous rational expectations regarding
inflation, monetary policy that was
intended to stabilize the macroeconomy
would, instead, be exactly neutral. Similarly,
is it not possible that endogeneity of the
norms, like Lucas's endogeneity of inflationary
expectations, will cause the neutralities
again to hold? We shall discuss this question
regarding all five neutralities. For the most
part, we find that the type of government
interventions being considered are usually of
such frequency, or of such order of magnitude,
that they should provoke relatively little
change in the norms. Endogeneity of the
norms should have little effect, then, on our
previous conclusions.

A. Ricardian Equivalence

Let's begin by returning to Ricardian equivalence,
which is still the simplest case. We
found that if people have a norm regarding the
amount of their bequest, then lump-sum transfers
to an older generation will not be neutral.
There remains the possibility that the source of
the warm glow to the older generation is not the
total bequest, but instead the bequest to the
younger generation net of the transfer. In this
case, if the transfers change, then the norm
changes. Ricardian equivalence will again be
valid. While such changes in norms with the
size of transfers are a theoretical possibility,
they also seem highly unlikely. The size of the
transfers involved--especially for those rich
enough to make large nonaccidental bequestswould
seem to be too small to warrant such a