LUCAS: MACROECONOMIC PRIORITIES
tials than those we see between fast-growing
economies like Taiwan and mature economies
like the United States. This is the kind of evidence
that leads to the use of y values at or near
1 in applications.
But the CRRA model has problems. Rajnish
Mehra and Prescott (1985) showed that if one
wants to use a stochastic growth model with
CRRA preferences to account for the entire
return differential between stocks and bondshistorically
about 6 percent-as a premium for
risk, the parameter y must be enormous, perhaps
50 or 100.11 Such values obviously cannot
be squared with (6). This "equity premium puzzle"
remains unsolved, and has given rise to a
vast literature that is clearly closely related to
the question of assessing the costs of
instability.12
One response to the puzzle is to adopt a
three- rather than two-parameter description
of preferences. Larry G. Epstein and Stanley
E. Zin (1989, 1991) and Philippe Weil (1990)
proposed different forms of recursive utility,
preference families in which there is one parameter
to determine intertemporal substitutability
and a second one to describe risk
aversion. The first corresponds to the parameter
y in (6), and can be assigned a small
value to fit estimated average returns to capital.
Then the risk-aversion parameter can be
chosen as large as necessary to account for
the equity premium.
Thomas D. Tallarini, Jr. (2000) uses preferences
of the Epstein-Zin type, with an intertemporal
substitution elasticity of 1, to construct a
real-business-cycle model of the U.S. economy.
He finds an astonishing separation of quantity
and asset price determination: The behavior of
aggregate quantities depends hardly at all on
attitudes toward risk, so the coefficient of risk
aversion is left free to account for the equity
premium perfectly.13 Tallarini estimates a welfare
cost of aggregate consumption risk of 10
percent of consumption, comparable to some
11 See also Lars Peter Hansen and Kenneth J. Singleton
(1983).
12 Two especially informative surveys are John H.
Cochrane and Hansen (1992) and Narayana R. Kocherlakota
(1996).
13 Similar results, obtained in a closely related context,
were reported by Hansen et al. (1999).
of the supply-side gains cited in Section I, and
two orders of magnitude larger than the estimate
I proposed in Section II.14 As Maurice Obstfeld
(1994) shows, this result is basically the formula
(4) with a coefficient of risk aversion two
orders of magnitude larger than the one I used.
Fernando Alvarez and Urban J. Jermann
(2000) take a nonparametric approach to the
evaluation of the potential gains from stabilization
policy, relating the marginal cost of business-
cycle risk to observed market prices
without ever committing to a utility function.
Their estimation procedure is based on the observation
that consumption streams with a wide
variety of different risk characteristics-or
something very nearly equivalent to them-are
available for sale in securities markets. They
use a mix of asset-pricing theory and statistical
methods to infer the prices of a claim to the
actual, average consumption path and alternative
consumption paths with some of the uncertainty
removed. They call the price differentials
so estimated marginal welfare costs, and show
that they will be upper bounds to the corresponding
total cost: my compensation parameter
A. The basic underlying hypotheses are that
asset markets are complete and that asset-price
differences reflect risk and timing differences
and nothing else.
The gain from the removal of all consumption
variability about trend, estimated in this
way, is large-around 30 percent of consumption.
15 This is a reflection of the high risk aversion
needed to match the 6-percent equity
premium, and can be compared to Tallarini's
estimate of 10 percent. But the gain from removing
risk at what Alvarez and Jermann call
business-cycle frequencies-cycles of eight
14 James Dolmas (1998) uses still another preference
family, obtaining much higher cost estimates than mine.
Like Tallarini, Christopher Otrok (1999) develops and analyzes
a complete real-business-cycle model. He uses a
preference family proposed by John Heaton (1995). His cost
estimates are close to mine. A recent paper by Anne
Epaulard and Aude Pommeret (2001) contains further
results along this line, and provides a very useful quantita-
tive comparison to earlier findings.
15 Alvarez and Jermann offer many estimates in their
Tables 2A-2D. My summary is based on Table 2D, which
uses postwar (1954-1997) data and requires that consump-
tion and dividends be cointegrated. From this table, I follow
the authors and cite averages over the columns headed "8
years" and "inf."
VOL. 93 NO. 1
7