tries (Fuchs, 1966, 1978a). The growth of the
service economy and improved methods of
contraception were bringing women into paid
employment and dramatically changing gender
roles and relationships. Lower fertility and
longer life expectancy were transforming the
age distribution of the population, and this
transformation, along with the fragmentation
of the family and the declining influence of
traditional religion, were creating new social
and economic conditions. The health sector,
with its nonprofit institutions, professional
dominance, sharply skewed distribution of demand,
and the critical importance of the consumer
in the production process, seemed like
a fruitful area for investigation. I was particularly
interested in trying to understand the determinants
of health and the determinants of
health care expenditures.
With regard to health, my research has led
me to emphasize the importance of nonmedical
factors such as genetic endowment, the
physical and psychosocial environment, and
personal behaviors such as cigarette smoking,
diet, and exercise. Over time, advances in
medical science contribute significantly to reductions
in morbidity and mortality; at any
given point in time, however, differences in
health levels within or between developed
countries are not primarily related to differences
in the quantity or quality of medical
care.8
With respect to expenditures on medical
care, my research has led me to emphasize the
importance of supply factors, especially technology
and the number and specialty mix of
physicians.9 To be sure, conventional demand
factors such as price, income, and insurance
play significant roles, but in my judgment concentration
on them to the exclusion of (partly
exogenous) supply factors misses a big part of
the expenditures story. Despite many attempts
to discredit it,'? the hypothesis that fee-forservice
physicians can and do induce demand
for their services is alive and well.11
My views about health and health care expenditures
have been formed not only through
research but also through close interaction
with medical scientists, practicing physicians,
and other health professionals. Since 1968 I
have maintained a regular medical school faculty
appointment in addition to my appointment
in economics, and have participated
every year in a wide variety of health-related
activities. This dual life would have gained approval
from John Stuart Mill who, in The Principles
of Political Economy (1848, reprinted
1987), wrote, "It is hardly possible to overrate
the value ... of placing human beings in contact
with persons dissimilar to themselves, and
with modes of thought and action unlike those
with which they are familiar ... Such communication
has always been ... one of the primary
sources of progress" (p. 581).
The proposition that the discipline of economics
has a great deal to contribute to health
and medical care is not one likely to require
elaborate defense before this audience. (I have
had audiences that were less receptive to this
notion.) It might, however, be useful to report
briefly just what it was in economics that I
found to be most relevant in the invasion of
alien turf. (To avoid undue suspense, let me
say at once that it was not game theory.)
In my experience, the most important contribution
we make is the economic point of
view, which may be summed up in three
words: scarcity, substitutability, and heterogeneity.
This economic point of view stands
in stark contrast to the romantic and monotechnic
points of view that I found prevalent
among health professionals and health policymakers.
The romantic point of view refuses to
accept the notion that resources are inherently
scarce; any apparent scarcity is attributed to
some manmade problem, such as capitalism or
socialism, market failure or excessive government
interference. In the 1960's and 1970's,
many physicians said that there was no need
to limit expenditures for medical care if only