takes the form that nominal considerations af-
fect real wage or price setting in some way or
other.
Evidence of one form of violation of the
assumptions of natural rate theory is especially
stark. That evidence concerns downward wage
rigidity. Such wage behavior can easily be per-
ceived statistically by examining distributions
of wage-changes. These distributions are char-
acterized by a bunching of wage changes at
exactly zero; there are some wage changes just
above zero in these distributions, but almost no
wage changes just below.68 Careful studies have
documented such wage stickiness in Australia,
Canada, Germany, Japan, Mexico, New Zea-
land, Switzerland, the United States, and the
United Kingdom.69,70 There seems to be no way
to account for such nominal wage rigidity with
the basic assumptions underlying natural rate
theory: that participants in the economy care
only about real prices and real wages.
Wage stickiness also explains a macroeco-
nomic observation that is an anomaly for natural
rate theory. Unemployment was so massive in
the Great Depression that inflation should have
been below inflationary expectations throughout
this long period. With any natural-rate adaptive-
expectations Phillips curve, such high unemploy-
ment would have caused a deflationary spiral.  Data on inflation are available for 12 countries for
the Great Depression. Not a single one of them  shows such a spiral.71 For example, the United
States experienced rapid deflation from 1929 to
1933, but inflation systematically neither rose nor
fell for the next decade. The predictions of natural
rate theory are thus grossly violated. But sticky
wages offer a good explanation for such behavior.
For example, a dynamic simulation of the US
economy with money wage rigidity and with
Depression-level unemployment fits the data all
but exactly (Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry 1996).72
Nominal wage rigidity may not only be sta-
tistically perceptible; it can also be macroeco-
nomically important, even outside of Great
Depressions. Nominal wage rigidity imparts a
long-run trade-off between unemployment and
long-run inflation. This trade-off is of sufficient
size that it should deter central banks from
targeting very low levels of inflation. For exam-
ple, simulations of the US economy (Akerlof,
Dickens, and Perry 1996) show that an increase
of the inflation target from 0 to 2 percent will
permanently reduce unemployment by 1.5 per-
centage points.73
Norms as Explanation for Sticky Money
Wages.-It seems to be impossible, or all but
impossible, to explain the existence of sticky
money wages, without relaxation of the basic
assumption that the utility functions of employ-
ees or of employers contain real arguments. A
simple and natural amendment to the standard
model explains such sticky money wages: that
employees have a norm for what wages should
be. According to that norm, they will lose utility
from a money wage decline. Sticky money
wages then result, as the bargains between em-
ployers and employees reflect the presence of
this ideal in the utility function.
Indeed, the study by Bewley (1999) gives