the discipline. The subjects of study are
posed by the unfolding course of scientific
developments" (p. 22). He goes on to add:
"This is not to say that the environment is
without influence...... "But, he continues,
"whether a fact or development is signifi-
cant depends primarily on its relevance to
current economic theory" (p. 23). (Com-
pare Tjalling Koopmans, p. 170.) What a
curious relating of rigor to relevance!
Whether the real world matters depends
presumably on "its relevance to current
economic theory." Many if not most of to-
day's economic theorists seem to agree
with this ordering of priorities.3
To what aspects of the observable world
does economics apply its analytical tools?
According to the familiar definition in the
International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, which we owe originally to Lionel
Robbins, economics "is the study of the
allocation of scarce resources among un-
limited and competing uses." To this defi-
nition of microeconomics the Encyclo-
pedia then rather weakly adds macroeco-
nomics, which is defined as the study of
money, the general price level, and the
level of output and employment.
Let us consider the microeconomic part
of this definition. Presumably the reference
is to real resources, used to produce ob-
servable goods and services, that are ex-
changed and consumed by real people liv-
ing in the kind of world we see around us.
Of course, some degree of abstraction is
necessary if useful generalizations are to be
reached. Here the economic theorist quickly
runs up against a dilemma. Shall he seek to
make his analysis ever more rigorous, re-
gardless of the possibly diminishing rele-
vance of his conclusions to the observed
world? Or shall he sacrifice elegant refine-
ment for somewhat cruder analysis that
may lead to testable results? I suppose the
reply can be given that we need to do both
and that we need specialists in each of
these approaches. But certainly those who
construct the analytical apparatus should
pay more attention than many of them
now do to the substantive problems with
which economists are presumably con-
cerned.4
In speaking of how well current micro-
economic theory combines rigor and rele-
vance, I should distinguish among the
different but interrelated problem areas
with which this part of economic theory
concerns itself. Micro theory addresses it-
self primarily to three related topics: (1)
the conditions necessary for, and the means
of actually achieving, an optimum alloca-
tion of resources within decision-making
units, both firms and households, under
given assumptions as to the criteria of op-
timization; (2) again under given assump-
tions, the conditions necessary for the
existence of a general (or partial) equilib-
rium among all (or some) of these decision-
making units, including the determination
of the uniqueness and stability of such an
equilibrium; and (3) the conditions re-
quired for the achievement of an economic
optimum from a broad, social point of
view.
Some success has been achieved in blend-
ing rigor and relevance in the theory of the
single decision-making unit. Certainly, as
this year's Nobel prize in economics attests,
considerable progress has been achieved in
dealing with production planning in the
individual firm or establishment (or gov-
ernment department) for which mathe-
matical tools, including programming and
the whole range of activity analysis, have
proved to be useful. To some extent, how-