this assumption becomes untenable. Perhaps
by accident its interests are those of
the public but there is no organic reason
why this must be so. In the absence of
proof to the contrary, divergence of interest,
not identity of interest, must be
assumed.

The nature of the conflict also becomes
predictable. Growth being a principal goal
of the planning system it will be great
where power is great. And in the market
sector of the economy, growth will, at least
by comparison, be deficient. This will not,
as neoclassical doctrine holds, be because
people have an amiable tendency to misunderstand
their needs. It will be because
the system is so constructed as to serve
badly their needs and then to win greater
or less acquiescence in the result. That the
present system should lead to an excessive
output of automobiles, an improbable
effort to cover the economically developed
sections of the planet with asphalt, a lunar
preoccupation with moon exploration, a
fantastically expensive and potentially
suicidal investment in missiles, submarines,
bombers, and aircraft carriers, is as one
would expect. These are the industries
with power to command resources for
growth. And central to public purpose
to sound resource utilization will be a
cutback in such industries, as all instinct
now suggests. Thus does the introduction
of power as a comprehensive aspect of our
system correct present error. Let us not
fail to note that these are exactly the industries
in which an uncomplicated neoclassical
view of monopoly and oligopoly
and of profit maximization at the expense
of ideal resource use would, of all things,
suggest an expansion of output. How
wrong are we allowed to be!
The counterpart of excessive resource
use in the planning system where power is
comprehensively deployed is a relatively
deficient resource use where power is circumscribed.
Such will be the case in the
part of the economy where competition
and entrepreneurial monopoly as distinct
from great organization are the rule. And
if the product or service is closely related
to comfort or survival, the discontent will
be considerable. That housing, health
services, local transportation, some household
services, are now areas of grave inadequacy
is agreed. It is in such industries
that all modern governments seek to expand
resource use. Here, in desperation,
even the devout free enterprisers accept
the need for social action, even of socialism.


Again, we may observe, the error of
economics is prejudicial. Although as
citizens we advocate restraint in the area
of excessive resource use, our teaching does
not. And though as citizens we urge social
action where the firm approaches the neoclassical
norm, our teaching does not. In
this latter case we not only disguise corporate
power but we make remedial action
in such areas as housing, health care,
transportation, also abnormal the consequence
of sui generis error that is never
quite explained. This is unfortunate for
here are tasks that require imagination,
pride and determination.

V

When power is admitted to our calculus,
our macroeconomic embarrassment also
disappears. Economics makes plausible
what governments are forced, in practice,
to do. Corporations have power in their
markets. So, and partly in consequence, do
unions. The competitive claims of unions
can most conveniently be resolved by passing
the cost of settlement along to the
public. Measures to arrest this exercise of
power by limiting aggregate demand must
be severe. And, not surprisingly, the power
of the planning system has been brought to
bear to exclude those macroeconomic measures
that have a primary effect on that
system. Thus monetary policy is entirely