change rates, and the like. Those that have
interested me especially in a study of the
1929 depression and other financial and economic
crises have been trading systems, international
money, capital flows, consistent
macroeconomic policies in periods of tranquility,
and a source of crisis management
when needed. By the last I mean the maintenance
of open markets in glut and a source
of supplies in acute shortage, plus a lender of
last resort in acute financial crisis (see my
1973 book, revised 1986, forthcoming).
Public goods are produced domestically by
government, unless the governmental agenda
is blocked in stalemate among competing
distributional coalitions as described by
Mancur Olson (1982). Voluntary provision
of public goods is plagued by the free rider.
In the international sphere where there is no
world government, the question remains how
public goods are produced. Ralph Bryant is
one of the few economists who has discussed
the public good element in international cooperation.
His vocabulary is different from
that of the political scientists: their "regimes"
are his "supranational traffic regulations"
(1980, p. 470), and he expects leadership in
cooperation in monetary and fiscal policy
from supranational institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund (p. 481). I find
this doubtful on the basis of the interwar
record of such institutions as the League of
Nations.
Political science in this field has produced
two schools: the realists who hold to a national-
interest theory of international politics,
and the moralists, whom Robert Keohane
prefers to call "institutionalists" (1984, p. 7).
Realists maintain that international public
goods are produced, if at all, by the leading
power, a so-called " hegemon," that is willing
to bear an undue part of the short-run costs
of these goods, either because it regards itself
as gaining in the long run, because it is paid
in a different coin such as prestige, glory,
immortality, or some combination of the two.
Institutionalists recognize that hegemonic
leaders emerge from time to time in the
world economy and typically set in motion
habits of international cooperation, called
"regimes," which consist of "principles,
norms, rules and decision-making procedures
around which the expectations of international
actors converge in given issue areas"
(Stephen Krasner, 1983, p. 1). Under British
hegemony, the regimes of free trade and the
gold standard developed more or less unconsciously.
With subsequent American
hegemony, a more purposeful process of institution
making was undertaken, with agreements
at Bretton Woods, on tariffs and trade,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, and the like. Political scientists
recognize that regimes are more readily
maintained than established since marginal
costs are below average costs; as hegemonic
periods come to an end with the waning of
the leading country's economic vitality, new
regimes needed to meet new problems are
difficult to create. Cooper (1985) has written
of the eighty years it took to create and get
functioning the World Health Organization
despite the clear benefits to all countries
from controlling the spread of disease. And
it takes work to maintain regimes; in the
absence of infusions of attention and money,
they tend in the long run to decay.
I originally suggested that the 1929 depression
was allowed to run unchecked because
there was no leading country able and willing
to take responsibility for crisis management,
halting beggar-thy-neighbor policies
from 1930, and especially acting as a lender
of last resort to prevent the serious run on
the Creditanstalt in May 1931 spreading, as
it did, to Germany, Britain, Japan, the United
States, and ultimately to the gold bloc. Britain,
the leading economic power of the nineteenth
century, was unable to halt the run;
the United States, which might have had the
ability, possibly assisted by France, was unwilling.
This view has been rejected by one
economic historian who holds that the troubles
of the interwar period were more
deep-seated, and that what was needed was
more fundamental therapy than maintaining
open markets and providing a lender of last
resort, something, that is, akin to the heroic
public good after World War II, the Marshall
Plan (D. E. Moggridge, 1982). That may
have been true, though there is no way I see
that the issue can be settled. Leadership at
an earlier stage in the 1920's, presumably
furnished by the United States with some