bishops, merchant princes, and patrons of the
arts. Whatever they did was for the pleasure it
gave them since they were so rich that earning
money was not their concern.
Hence, leisure is not a synonym for indolence,
but a reference to desirable forms of effort
or work. As George Bernard Shaw (1928)
put it, "labor is doing what we must; leisure
is doing what we like; and rest is doing nothing
whilst our bodies and our minds are recovering
from their fatigue." In order to avoid confusion,
in the balance of this address I reserve
the word "work" for use in its physiological
sense, an activity that requires energy, over
and above the basal metabolic rate (BMR).
Activity aimed primarily at earning a living I
will call " earnwork. " Purely voluntary activity,
even if it incidentally carries some payment
with it, I will call "volwork "
Why have hours of earnwork declined so
much in recent years? The answer to that question
is suggested by the fact that it is not just
daily and weekly hours of earnwork that have
declined. The share of lifetime discretionary
hours spent in earnwork has declined even
more rapidly. Table 2 only dealt with the hours
of earnwork of persons in the labor force. It
did not reflect the fact that the average age of
entering the labor force is about five years later
today than it was in 1880, or that the average
period of retirement for those who live to age
50 is about 11 years longer today than it was
in 1880 (cf., Lee, 1996). A century ago only
one out of five males aged 65 and older were
retired. Today, six out of seven are retired.
All in all the lifetime discretionary hours
spent earning a living have declined by about
one-third over the past century (see Table 3)
despite the large increase in the total of lifetime
discretionary time. In 1880, four-fifths of
discretionary time was spent eamning a living.
Today, the lion's share (59 percent) is spent
doing what we like. Moreover, it appears probable
that by 2040 over three-quarters of discretionary
time will be spent doing what we
like, despite a fuLrther substantial increase in
discretionary time due to the continuing extension
of the life span (cf., Jesse H. Ausubel and
A. Griibler, 1995).

Why this deep desire for volwork? Why do
so many people want to forgo earnwork which
would allow them to buy more food, clothing,
housing, and other goods'? The answer tumrs
partly on the extraordinary technological
change of the past century, which has not only
greatly reduced the nunmber of hours of labor
the average individual needs to obtain his or
her -food supply, but has also made housing,
clothing, and a vast array of consurner durables
so cheap in real terms that the totality of
material consumption requires miuch fewer
hours of labor today than was required over a
lifetine for food alone in 1880.
Indeed, we have become so rich that we are
approaching saturation' in the consumption
not only of necessities, but of goods recently
thought to be luxuries, or which were only
dreams or science fiction during the first third
of the twentieth century. T'oday there is an average
of two cars per household in the United
States. Nearly every household with a person
competent to drive a car has one. On some
items such as radios, we seem to have reachied
supersaturation, since there is now more than
one radio per ear (5.6 per household). The
point is not merely that we are reaching saturation
in commodities that once defined a high
standard of living aiid quality of life but also
that the hours of labor required to obtain those
comnmodities have drastically declined. The
typical household in 1875 required 1,800
hours of labor in the marketplace to acquire
the annual food supply, but today it takes jus.t
260 hours. All in all, the comfrmodities that
used to account for over 80 percent of household
consumption can now be obtained in
greater abundance than previously, with less