Median
O1 100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0 Ask
Bid
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Quantity
FIGURE 1. PENCIL EXPERIMENT OFFERS
which consumers show a reluctance to trade
away from any position in which they are established.
The endowment effect appears in
stated preference studies, where WTP for an
increased amount of a commodity is typically
far less than willingness to accept (WTA) a
reduced amount of the commodity. Some gap is
expected, due to diminishing marginal utility,
but experiments show gaps far too large to be
explained by classical income and substitution
effects. For example, a study by McFadden et
al. (1988) of stated WTP for changes in reliability
of electricity supply found that mean stated
WTP for a change between two levels, neither
of them the status quo, was valued consistently
by consumers independently of their status quo,
but in comparisons between the status quo and
any alternative, the status quo was given extra
value, independent of its level. It appears that
the hedonic treadmill is at work, with people
habituating to their current state, and viewing
changes with distaste.  A dramatic illustration of the endowment effect
is the now-classic cup experiment of Jack  L. Knetsch (1989), in which a random assignment
of coffee cups in a class, followed by an
opportunity to trade, produced a large gap between
WTP and WTA, with far less trading than
should be needed to move from a random allocation
to a Pareto optimal one (see also Kahneman
et al., 1990). I repeated this experiment in
an introductory microeconomics course at
Berkeley, using pencils embossed with the
course name. About half of the 345 students,
172, were randomly assigned a pencil. Then, a
Vickery sealed-bid uniform-price double auction
was held to reallocate the pencils (see Kiho
Yoon, 2005). In this auction, each bidder has an
incentive to report her true value, independently
of the strategies of others. The income effect of
being endowed with a pencil is negligible, so
that with random assignment the distributions
of money marginal utilities of a pencil should be
the same for buyers and sellers. Then if consumers
are neoclassically rational, there should
be no endowment effect.
Consider a market with N participants with
values v, > "> VN, and K randomly allocated