been noted by Gaertner, Pattanaik, and
Suzumura (1992), who have recently provided
the most extensive recharacterization
of liberty (in terms of "game forms"), the
impossibility problem "persists under virtually
every plausible concept of individual
rights" (p. 161).40
The decisive move in the direction of a
purely procedural view of liberty was made
by Nozick (1974), responding to my social
choice formulation and to the impossibility
of the Paretian liberal (Sen, 1970). This has
been followed by important constructive
contributions by Gardenfors (1981) and
Sugden (1981), and the approach has been
extended and developed into game-form
formulations by Gaertner et al. (1992). In
the game-form view, each of the players has
a set of permissible strategies, and the outcome
is a function of the combination of
strategies chosen by each of the players
(perhaps qualified by an additional "move"
by "nature"). The liberties and rights of the
different persons are defined by specifying a
permissible subset from the product of the
strategy sets of the different individuals. A
person can exercise his rights as he likes,
subject to the strategy combination belonging
to the permissible set.
In defining what rights a person has, or in
checking whether his rights were respected,
there is, on this account, no need to examine
or evaluate the resulting state of affairs,
and no necessity to examine what states the
individuals involved prefer. In contrasting
this characterization of preference-independent,
consequence-detached rights with the
social choice approach to rights, perhaps
the central question that is raised is the
plausibility of making people's putative
rights, in general, so dissociated from the
effects of exercising them. This is a general
issue that was already discussed at a broader
level (Section VI).
In some contexts, the idea of seeing rights
in the form of permission to act can be
quite inadequate, particularly because of
"choice inhibition" that might arise from a
variety of causes. The long British discussion
on the failure of millions of potential
welfare recipients from making legitimate
claims (apparently due to the shame and
stigma of having one's penury publicized
and recorded) illustrates a kind of nonrealization
of rights in which permission is not
the main issue at all.4' Similarly, the inability
of women in traditionally sexist societies
to use even those rights that have not been
formally denied to them also illustrates a
type of rights failure that is not helpfully
seen in terms of game forms (see Sen, 1992b
pp. 148-50). Even the questions that standardly
come up in this country in determining
whether a rape has occurred have to go
well beyond checking whether the victim in
question was "free" to defy.
Leaving out such cases, it might well be
plausible to argue that rights can be nicely
characterized by game forms in many situations.
However, even when that is the case,
in deciding on what rights to protect and
codify, and in determining how the underlying
purpose might be most effectively
achieved, there is a need to look at the
likely consequences of different game-form
specifications and to relate them to what
people value and desire. If, for example, it
appears that not banning smoking in certain
gatherings (leaving the matter to the discretion
of the people involved) would actually
lead to unwilling victims having to inhale
40The belief that the problem can be resolved
through Pareto-improving contracts, which has been
suggested by some authors, overlooks the incentiveincompatibility
of the touted solution and, perhaps  more importantly, confounds the nature of the conflict
itself, since the conflict in values keeps open the question
as to what contracts would be offered or accepted
by the persons involved. For example, in the (rather
overdiscussed) case of whether the prude or the lewd
should read Lady Chatterley's Lover, it is not at all
clear that the prude, if he has any libertarian inclinations,
would actually offer a contract by which he
agrees to read a book that he hates to make the lewd
refrain from reading a book he loves. In fact, while the
prude may prefer that the lewd does not read that
book, consistent with that he may not want to bring
this about through an enforceable contract, and the
"dilemma of the Paretian liberal" could be his dilemma
too. The lewd too faces a decision problem about
whether to try to alter the prude's personal life rather
than minding his own business. On these issues, see
Sen (1983, 1992b), Basu (1984), and Elster and Hylland  (1986).  41Stig Kanger (1985) has illuminatingly discussed  "nonrealization" of rights, and the variety of ways this
can occur.