conventional micro-economic theory as it
has developed, particularly in the last
seventy-five years or so, takes a normative
stance by default.9 Indeed, it takes a
normative stance by more than default. It
says outright that the primary question to
which economists should address them-
selves is the "optimum" allocation of re-
sources, and it insists on providing a pre-
cise definition of optimum. (Compare
Ward, pp. 52-54, 90.) Since, as Koopmans
points out, competitive equilibrium theory
ignores the welfare implications of the per-
sonal distribution of income that results,
"the term 'optimum' [is] a misnomer"
(p. 49). (See also Ward, pp. 197-98.)
My remarks thus far have been directed
toward microeconomics. But macro-eco-
nomic analysis also must face the problem
of how optimally to combine rigor and
relevance. What we today call macro-
economics grew out of the catastrophe of
the Great Depression,'0 and in the early
development of macro-economic analysis
relevance took precedence over rigor. To-
day, rigor competes with relevance in
macro-economic and monetary theory, and
in some lines of development macro and
monetary theorists, like many of their col-
leagues in micro theory, seem to consider
relevance to be more or less irrelevant. A
good example has been the elaboration of
so-called growth theory Ahich now seems
to be losing some of its earlier popularity.
Apparently, there has come to be a growing
recognition that the considerable efforts
spent on growth models have not signifi-
cantly advanced knowledge beyond the
contributions of the original Harrod-Domar
and the Solow-Swan neoclassical models.
And other intriguing topics have arisen to
stimulate the pursuit of rigor at the ex-
pense of relevance.
In both micro- and macroeconomics, ef-
forts are sometimes made to extract a drop
or two of relevance from exercises in ana-
lytical rigor; and conclusions are drawn
about the functioning of some aspect of
the real world, or policy recommendations
are made, on the basis of theoretical exer-
cises which rest on assumptions that fly in
the face of the facts. One example is the
frequent fitting of the neoclassical invest-
ment function, with its built-in assump-
tions of constant returns and perfect com-
petition, to industries in which these as-
sumptions obviously do not hold. Another
example is a good deal of the recent litera-
ture seeking to reformulate the micro-
economic foundations of macro-economic
theory and policy-what Edmund Phelps
(1969, 1972) has termed "The New Micro-
economics in Inflation and Employment
Theory." The theoretical analysis in much
of this literature rests on assumptions that
also fly in the face of the facts. To cite a
few examples: all unemployment is a vol-
untary activity as part of a search proce-
dure in which workers are continuously
equating costs and prospective benefits at
the margin; the labor supply is typically
taken to be homogeneous with perfect mo-
bility among labor submarkets; so-called
structural unemployment is ignored as are
the striking differences in unemployment
rates among different age, sex, ethnic, and
occupational groups; and downward wage
flexibility is generally assumed, although
some recent attempts have been made to
relax this assumption. Another related re-
cent development in which theory pro-
ceeds with impeccable logic from unrealis-
tic assumptions to conclusions that contra-
dict the historical record, is the recent
work on rational expectations. (Compare
Robert J. Gordon.) And, as a final illustra-
tion I might cite much of the recent litera-
ture on capital theory.
II
I turn now from the first part of my title
to the second from rigor and relevance to