output proportions constant, we have an
ordinary total cost curve, OST. With one
exception, which I will note soon, I have
drawn it to have the usual sort of shape, with
marginal costs falling near the origin and
rising at points much further from the origin.
On the other hand, the trans ray cut above
AB yields a cross section C'TC which is more
or less U shaped. This means that it is relatively
cheaper to produce boots and shoes
together (point U) than to produce them in
isolation (point A or point B). That is, this
convex trans ray shape is enough to offer us
the complementarity which leads firms and
industries to turn out a multiplicity of products
rather than specializing in the production
of a single good.

Now what, in such a case, corresponds to
the flat bottom of an AC curve in a single
product case? The answer is that the cost
function in the neighborhood of the corresponding
output must be linearly homogeneous.
In Figure 5 such a region, a/3yS, is
depicted. It is linearly homogeneous because
it is generated by a set of rays such as L, M,
and N. For simplicity in the discussion that
follows, I have given this region a very regular
shape-it is, approximately, a rectangle
which has been moved into three-dimensional
space and given a U-shaped cross section.
Now Figure 6 combines the two preceding
diagrams and we see that they have been
drawn to mesh together, so that the linearly
homogeneous region constitutes a portion of
the firm's total cost surface. We see then that
the firm's total cost does have a region in
which constant returns to scale occur, and
which corresponds to the flat-bottomed segment
of the A C curve.



Moreover, as before, I have deliberately
kept this segment quite narrow. Indeed, I
have repeated the previous proportions, letting
the segment extend from a distance ym
from the origin to the distance I 4ym along
any ray on the floor of the diagram.
Let us now see what happens in these
circumstances when we turn to the total cost
surface for the industry. This is depicted in
Figure 7 which shows a relationship that
may at first seem surprising. In Figure 7 I
depict only the linearly homogeneous portions
of the industry's cost surface. There we
see that while for the firm linear homogeneity
prevailed only in the interval from y' to
13 Imy in the case of industry output linear
homogeneity also holds in that same interval
but, in addition, it holds for the interval 2ym
to 22 , and in the region extending from
3ym to infinity. That is, everywhere beyonc
3y' the industry's total cost function is linearly
homogeneous. In this case, then, we
have three regions of local linear homogeneity