We, no less than other writers, owe a heavy
debt to predecessors from Bertrand to Bain,
from Cournot to Demsetz. Nevertheless, it
must surely be acknowledged that the following
characterization of the general tenor of
the literature as it appeared until fairly recently
is essentially accurate.

First, in the received analysis perfect competition
serves as the one standard of welfare-
maximizing structure and behavior.
There is no similar form corresponding to
industries in which efficiency calls for a very
limited number of firms (though the earlier
writings on workable competition did move
in that direction in a manner less formal
than ours).

Our analysis, in contrast, provides a generalization
of the concept of the perfectly competitive
market, one which we call a "perfectly
contestable market." It is, generally,
characterized by optimal behavior and yet
applies to the full range of industry structures
including even monopoly and oligopoly.
In saying this, it must be made clear that
perfectly contestable markets do not populate
the world of reality any more than perfectly
competitive markets do, though there
are a number of industries which undoubtedly
approximate contestability even if
they are far from perfectly competitive. In
our analysis, perfect contestability, then,
serves not primarily as a description of reality,
but as a benchmark for desirable
industrial organization which is far more
flexible and is applicable far more widely
than the one that was available to us before.
Second, in the standard analysis (including
that of many of our fellow rebels), the properties
of oligopoly models are heavily dependent
on the assumed expectations and reaction
patterns characterizing the firms that
are involved. When there is a change in the
assumed nature of these expectations or reactions,
the implied behavior of the oligopolistic
industry may change drastically.
In our analysis, in the limiting case of
perfect contestability, oligopolistic structure
and behavior are freed entirely from their
previous dependence on the conjectural variations
of incumbents and, instead, these are
generally determined uniquely and, in a
manner that is tractable analytically, by the
pressures of potential competition to which
Bain directed our attention so tellingly.
Third, the standard analysis leaves us with
the impression that there is a rough continuum,
in terms of desirability of industry
performance, ranging from unregulated pure
monopoly as the pessimal arrangement to
perfect competition as the ideal, with relative
efficiency in resource allocation increasing
monotonically as the number of firms expands.


I will show that, in contrast, in perfectly
contestable markets behavior is sharply
discontinuous in its welfare attributes. A
contestable monopoly offers us some presumption,
but no guarantee, of behavior consistent
with a second best optimum, subject
to the constraint that the firm be viable
financially despite the presence of scale
economies which render marginal cost pricing
financially infeasible. That is, a contestable
monopoly has some reason to adopt the
Ramsey optimal price-output vector, but it
may have other choices open to it. (For the
analysis of contestable monopoly, see my
article with Elizabeth Bailey and Willig, Panzar
and Willig's article, and my book with
Panzar and Willig, chs. 7 and 8.)
But once each product obtains a second
producer, that is, once we enter the domain
of duopoly or oligopoly for each and every
good, such choice disappears. The contestable
oligopoly which achieves an equilibrium
that immunizes it from the incursions of
entrants has only one pricing option-it must
set its price exactly equal to marginal cost
and do all of the things required for a first
best optimum! In short, once we leave the
world of pure or partial monopoly, any contestable
market must behave ideally in every
respect. Optimality is not approached gradually
as the number of firms supplying a
commodity grows. As has long been suggested
in Chicago, two firms can be enough
to guarantee optimality (see, for example,
Eugene Fama and Arthur Laffer).
Thus, the analysis extends enormously the
domain in which the invisible hand holds
sway. In a perfectly contestable world, it
seems to rule almost everywhere. Lest this