power widely; the Federal Reserve System
was created as a loose agglomeration of
twelve regional money markets but quickly
fused into a single system in World War I.
Centralization and federalization have reflections
in demography and in finance.
City populations in unified states follow a
Pareto-skewed distribution with a single
dominant city like London, Paris, or Vienna,
and no close rival among the tail of smaller
cities and towns. In federations the distribution
of cities is log normal (Brian Berry,
1961). Parallel to the demographic division is
the financial. Paris has 91.3 percent of French
bank clearings; London 87 percent of those
for Britain. The contrast is with Canada:
Toronto, 37.3 percent; Montreal, 25.5 percent;
Vancouver, 6.5 percent. Between these
extremes lies Japan with Tokyo 51.2 percent
and Osaka 19.7 percent (Jean Labasse, 1974,
pp. 144-45).

One explanation for differences between
centralized and federal states is historical:
where larger states were formed later from
unification of lesser units, administrative and
financial functions were already being discharged
at the local level, reducing the need
for centralized services. This hypothesis faces
the difficult counterexamples of Italy and
Germany, unified out of smaller units in the
second half of the nineteenth century, that
quickly centralized administrative and financial
functions, in Rome and Milan for Italy,
and in Berlin for Germany. Another explanation
runs in terms of size, with larger
states necessarily federal because of the difficulty
of providing administration to local
units over long distances. This fits Canada,
Australia, the United States, perhaps India,
but fails to account for Switzerland, unless
size is a proxy for maintaining a dense network
of communication, and division of valleys
by high mountains produces barriers
equivalent to those of continental states. If
the mathematically minded among you need
an analogue, think of federal states as decomposable
matrices.

The difference between a single state and a
federation may be illustrated with two examples.
Some years ago, Seymour Harris (1952)
wrote a book on New England in which he
claimed that the area got a raw deal from the
rest of the country because it paid more in
taxes to the federal government than it received
in federal expenditure. This thesis implicitly
violated the distinction between a
budget and a market: in a market equal
values are exchanged. A budget, on the other
hand, is a device expressing the cohesion of a
sharing group with monies raised according
to one standard, perhaps ability to pay, and
expenditure distributed according to another,
some combination of efficiency and need.
The other example, equally shocking to an
international trade economist, was the notion
of the juste retour, or fair return, propounded
by France in connection with expenditure
for joint projects in Europe. France
insisted that all monies contributed by her be
spent in France. Tied sales are a third- or
fourth-best device to limit balance-of-payments
deficits for a given contribution to
joint efforts, or to maximize the contribution
for a given deficit. They are inefficient rather
than fair.

IV

But I want to move on to the geopolitical
unit that produces public goods. It is a cliche
that these have increased in size as costs of
transport and communication have declined.
Under the eighteenth-century Poor Law in
England, the parish resisted immigration
from neighboring parishes because of reluctance
to share with outsiders. Fernand
Braudel (1982) and Sir John Hicks (1969)
have each expatiated on the rise of the size of
the economic unit from the city-state to the
nation-state. National and international markets
for goods and money grew slowly, with
entrepot centers that intermediated between
buyers and sellers surviving in money- cheap
to move in space-and largely disappearing
for goods where costs of transport were high
and could be saved by direct selling, rather
than relaying goods through fairs in the Middle
Ages and later through cities such
as Amsterdam, Hamburg, Frankfurt, and
London. The hub-and-spoke system recently
discovered in airplane travel and still in place
for money has long been superceded in goods.
Caroline Isard and Walter Isard's (1945)
point that the most pervasive changes in the