response to growing "foreign exchange short-
age," in reaction to the "unfairness" of the
undifferentiated controls, and in response to
evasion of the regimes."9 Periodic balance of
payments crises arose in reaction to overval-
uation of the real exchange rate, increased in-
debtedness, and the failure of export earnings
to grow.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) "sta-
bilization" programs were undertaken, under
which import regimes were simplified and ra-
tionalized (as import licensing was, in those
years, not abolished). The nominal exchange
rate was normally altered (but usually to a
new fixed exchange rate in the face of con-
tinuing inflation).20 Even in IMF programs,
however, it was seldom intended that the
underlying trade policies related to import
substitution be changed: the intent, rather,
was to rationalize the trade regime and find
ways to induce more foreign exchange earn-
ings to finance the capital goods that would
be imported to undertake additional import-
substitution investments. Growth proceeded
in "stop-go" fashion, as periods of foreign
exchange crisis were followed by tight(er)
monetary and fiscal policies, a consequent re-
duction in excess demand for imports, and an
increase in foreign exchange earnings. When
the trade regime was again relaxed, growth
resumed and the demand for imports again
mushroomed until the next crisis.21
E. Research Directions and Contributions
Most research in the 1950's and 1960's was
based on the premises outlined above, and sup-
ported the basic thrusts of policy. It needs only
brief mention here. Some focussed on the pos-
sible existence of externalities and the need for
"balanced growth," as it was assumed that
expansion of any one industry alone would not
be feasible because of the limited size of the
market.22 This prescription, of course, was
based on the premise that development of
manufactured exports was not feasible. An-
other line of supportive research focussed on
planning models, concentrating in large part
on interindustry flows and linkages.23 Empir-
ical research on pattems of development be-
gan, focussing on the structure of economies
and their growth performance. For more than
a decade, the growing disparity between the-
ory and practice was all but ignored.
There was also research providing a ration-
ale for protection of new industries and import
substitution. These results demonstrated that
domestic distortions could warrant trade inter-
vention24 in a number of situations. Everett E.
Hagen (1958), in perhaps the best known of
these, set up a model assuming that urban
wages exceeded rural wages exogenously, and
demonstrated that a tariff could improve wel-
fare by inducing resources into the (artifi-
cially) higher-cost urban industries.
Work also continued on structuralist mod-
els, as a number of authors found reasons
why developing countries' economic struc-
tures were "different" and why, therefore, the
usual economic analysis would not apply.25
Chenery and Michael Bruno (1962), Chenery
and Alan Strout (1966), and Chenery and
many other coauthors developed the "two-
gap" model, using the stylized fact that
foreign exchange was "scarce" in devel-
oping countries. In this model, export earnings
were exogenously given and growing more
slowly than the demand for foreign exchange.