economy came from innovations in transport
and communications remains valid: contem-
plate the rudder (in place of the steering
oar), fore-and-aft sails; the turnpike; canal;
railroad (despite Robert Fogel, 1964); the
steamship; iron-clad ship; telegraph; tele-
phone; refrigerator ship; radio; airplane;
bulk carrier; jet airplane; satellite television.
The numbers of people brought into face-
to-face contact across continents and hemi-
spheres has increased exponentially. It is true,
to be sure, as was said about a well-known
governor and presidential candidate, that it
was impossible to dislike him until one got to
know him, and increases in mobility and
communications have been accompanied by
separatism: of the Walloons from the Flemish
in Belgium, of Scotland and Wales in the
United Kingdom (to pass over the troubled
Irish question), and of the Quebecois in
Canada.3 But it is easier than in Adam
Smith's day to imagine ourselves in the cir-
cumstances of the Chinese, the inhabitants of
the Sahelian desert in Africa, or the
tornado-struck islands of Bangladesh as we
see them nightly on our television screens via
satellite. Do wider communication and trans-
port change the production and distribution
of public goods?
Conflicts between economics and political
science abound, and many arise from the
fact that goods, money, corporations, and
people are mobile, whereas the state is fixed.
The increase in mobility produced by in-
novations in transport and communication
during and after World War II led some of
us to conclude that the nation-state was in
difficulty. A reaction occurred in the 1970's.
It is significant that Raymond Vernon's in-
fluential book Sovereignty at Bay (1971),
showing the multinational corporation ascen-
dant over the state, was followed by his
Storm over Multinationals (1977) in which
the position is reversed. Cooper's The Eco-
nomics of Interdependence (1968) was fol-
lowed by an upsurge of interest in national
autonomy, decoupling, and pluralism among
political scientists, most of whom approve
the nation-state and have as heroes, if they
will forgive me, not Adam Smith and
Woodrow Wilson, but Otto von Bismarck
and perhaps even Charles de Gaulle. The
tension remains, however. Mobility limits the
state's capacity to enforce its writ in taxa-
tion, in foreign policy, in standards on such
matters as antitrust, pure food and drugs,
insider trading in securities, and the like.
Mobility undermines social cohesion through
the easy intrusion of different nationalities,
races, religions, and traditions into the body
politic.
V
I come at long last to international public
goods. The primary one is peace. Economists
are poorly qualified to discuss how, after
war, peace is restored and maintained. Most
of us reject the Marxian view that war grows
directly out of capitalism, and as ordinary
citizens and amateur students of history are
prepared to agree that peace may be pro-
vided by a dominant world power- Pax
Romana or Pax Britannica-or by balance-
of-power maneuvering, although that seems
accident prone. Among the more audacious
economists producing an economic theory or
set of theories on war is Walt Rostow (1960,
pp. 108 ff.). There are views that ascribe war
to population pressure, to ambitious rulers
aggressively seeking power, and to complex
miscalculation. How these are to be avoided
or contained is a question primarily for polit-
ical science.
In the economic sphere, various interna-
tional public goods have been identified: an
open trading system, including freedom of
the seas, well-defined property rights, stan-
dards of weights and measures that may
include international money, or fixed ex-