I. The Meaning of Supply and Demand
in a Macroeconomic Context
It is worth considering whether a new
basic model should guide our thinking
about performance of the economy as a
whole. It is not that the macro models of
the past twenty-five years or so have failed
to serve us well. When we consider the state
of our knowledge about the analytics of the
economy at the end of World War II and
the apprehensiveness with which we approached
the modern era of expansion, it
should be evident that we have come a long
way professionally. Yet the economic problems
of today seem to be intractable when
studied through the medium of simplified
macro models. The new system should
combine the Keynesian model of final demand
and income determination with the
Leontief model of interindustrial flows.
This is the motivation for my focusing attention
on the supply side of the economy.
It is frequently said, in almost an offhand
manner, that the theories of aggregate employment
and output determination are demand
models, that economic policy for
overall direction of the economy is a policy
of demand management. I would generally
agree with these remarks, but not in every
last detail, once the meaning of demand in
these contexts is carefully pulled apart and
analyzed. The demand aspects are possibly
overstated.

It is, of course, true that demand for the
GNP built up as the sum of demands by
consumers, businesses, government, and
foreigners (consumption, investment, public
spending, and net exports) covers total demand
in the economy and is composed of
demands by the constituent parts. But demand
by firms, and, in many cases by government,
are not ends in themselves. Business
demand is largely for goods to produce
goods. The capital formation that results
from business demand goes into the increment
of capital stock, after allowance for
capital consumption, and the capital stock
becomes a factor input in the production
function. The accumulation of capital contributes
to the supply of goods and services.
Indeed, investment demand now for new
capital facilitates the implementation of the
production process with the supply of factors
of ever-increasing powers of productivity,
thus making it possible to supply increasing
amounts of goods and services
with inputs that are increasing at a somewhat
slower rate.

By focusing attention excessively on the
"short run," in which the capital stock is
timelessly held fixed by assumption only
and not in reality, we have ignored the supply-
side characteristics of investment demand.
Students of today's business cycle
commonly cite investment demand as the
promising potential route to higher productivity
in the relatively near future, thereby
lessening inflationary pressure. In this respect,
economic theoreticians have been
myopic relative to the applied economic
analysts in the world of affairs. Nevertheless,
as we shall see, there is much more
to the supply side than the transformation
of investment into productive capital, and
the basic characterization of contemporary
macroeconomics as demand analysis has a
point. A strong indication of the demand
side orientation is given by the elaboration
of the standard macro model. In place of
aggregate consumption, the more elaborate
model gives separate treatment to consumer
expenditures on durables, nondurables, and
services. This is the first stage. At a higher
stage, there is further disaggregation into
types of durables, nondurables, and services
such as food, cars, medical services, etc.
The detail that is introduced for consumption