choice-oriented conditions of indepen-
dence, the Pareto principle, nondictator-
ship, and unrestricted domain, even without
invoking any "social preference," and with-
out imposing any demand of "collective ra-
tionality," or any intermenu consistency
condition on social choice.18
The morals to be drawn from all this for
Buchanan's questioning of "social prefer-
ence" would appear to be the following.
The "impossibility" result identified in a
particular form by Arrow can be extended
and shown to hold even when the idea of
"social preference" is totally dropped and
even when no conditions are imposed on
"internal consistency" of social choice. This
does not, however, annul the importance of
Buchanan's criticism of the idea of social
preference (in the context of choices emerg-
ing from decision mechanisms for the soci-
ety), since it is a valid criticism on its own
right. But the "impossibility" problem iden-
tified by Arrow cannot be escaped by this
move.
IV. On Reasoned Social Welfare Judgments
How might we then avoid that impossibil-
ity? It is important to distinguish the
bearing of the problem in the making of
aggregative social welfare judgments, as op-
posed to the operation of social decision
mechanisms. I start with the former.
It may be recalled that the Bergson-
Samuelson analysis and Arrow's impossibil-
ity theorem followed a turn in welfare eco-
nomics that had involved the dropping of
interpersonal comparisons of utility. As it
happens, because of its utilitarian form, tra-
ditional welfare economics had informa-
tional exclusions of its own, and it had been
opposed to any basic use of nonutility infor-
mation, since everything had to be judged
ultimately by utility sum-totals in conse-
quent states of affairs. To this was now
added the exclusion of interpersonal com-
parisons of utilities, without removing the
exclusion of nonutility information. This
barren informational landscape makes it
hard to arrive at systematic judgments of
social welfare. Arrow's theorem can be in-
terpreted, in this context, as a demonstra-
tion that even some very weak conditions
relating individual preferences to social wel-
fare judgments cannot be simultaneously
satisfied given this informational privation.19
The problem is not just one of impossibil-
ity. Consider the Field-Expansion Lemma:
decisiveness over any pair of alternatives en-
tails decisiveness over every pair of alterna-
tives, irrespective of the nature of the states
involved. Consider three divisions of a given
cake between two persons: (99,1), (50,50),
and (1, 99). Let us begin with the assumption
that each person-as homo economicus -
prefers a larger personal share of the cake. So
they happen to have opposite preferences.
Consider now the ranking of (99,1) and
(50, 50). If it is decided that (50, 50) is better
for the society than (99,1), then in terms of
preference-based information, person 2's
preference is getting priority over person l's.
A variant of the Field-Expansion Lemma
would then claim that person 2's preference
must get priority over all other pairs as well,
so that even (1,99) must be preferred to
(50, 50).20 Indeed, it is not possible, given
the assumptions, to regard (50, 50) as best of
the three; we could either have (99,1), giv-
ing priority to person l's preference, or
(1,99), giving priority to 2's preference. But
not (50, 50). I am not arguing here that
(50,50) must necessarily be taken to be the
best, but it is absurd that we are not even
permitted to consider (50,50) as a claimant