reduced form equations relying on just two exogenous
variables are very unreliable for the purpose
of estimating structure, nor are they
particularly accurate for forecasting, though per
dollar of research expenditure they are surprisingly
good. Second, if the St. Louis people want
to go on using this method and wish to secure the
best possible forecast, then they should ask the
MPS or any other large econometric model what
coefficients they should use for government
expenditure, rather than trying to estimate them
by their unreliable method.
From the theory and evidence reviewed, we
must then conclude that opting for a constant rate
of growth of the nominal money supply can
result in a stable economy only in the absence of
significant exogenous shocks. But obviously the
economy has been and will continue to be exposed
to many significant shocks, coming from
such things as war and peace, and other large
changes in government expenditure, foreign
trade, agriculture, technological progress, population
shifts, and what not. The clearest evidence
on the importance of such shocks is provided by
our postwar record with its six recessions.
IV. The Record of Stabilization Policies:
Stabilizing or Destabilizing
A. Was Postwar Instability Due to Unstable
Money Growth?

At this point, of course, monetarists will object
that, over the postwar period, we have not
had a constant money growth policy and will hint
that the observed instability can largely be traced
to the instability of money. The only way of
meeting this objection squarely would be, of
course, to rerun history with a good computer
capable of calculating 3 percent at the helm of
the Fed.

A more feasible, if less conclusive approach
might be to look for some extended periods in
which the money supply grew fairly smoothly
and see how the economy fared. Combing
through our post-Korean War history, I have
been able to find just two stretches of several
years in which the growth of the money stock
was relatively stable, whether one chooses to
measure stability in terms of percentage deviations
from a constant growth or of dispersion of
four-quarter changes. It may surprise some that
one such stretch occurred quite recently and
consists of the period of nearly four years beginning
in the first quarter of 1971 (see the author
and Papademos, 1976). During this period, the
average growth was quite large, some 7 percent,
but it was relatively smooth, generally well
within the 6 to 8 percent band. The average
deviation from the mean is about .75 percent.
The other such period lasted from the beginning
of 1953 to the first half of 1957, again a stretch
of roughly four years. In sharp contrast to the
most recent period, the average growth here is
quite modest, only about 2 percent; but again,
most four-quarter changes fell well within a
band of two percentage points, and the average
deviation is again .7. By contrast, during the
remaining 13-year stretch from mid-1957 to the
end of 1970, the variability of money growth
was roughly twice as large if measured by the
average deviation of four quarter changes, and
some five times larger if measured by the percentage
deviation of the money stock from a
constant growth trend.

How did the economy fare in the two periods
of relatively stable money growth? It is common
knowledge that the period from 1971 to 1974, or
from 1972 to 1975 if we want to allow a one-year
lag for money to do its trick, was distinctly the
most unstable in our recent history, marked by
sharp fluctuations in output and wild gyrations
of the rate of change of prices. As a result, the
average deviation of the four-quarter changes in
output was 3.3 percent, more than twice as large
as in the period of less stable money growth. But
the first stretch was also marked by well above
average instability, with the contraction of 1954,
the sharp recovery of 1955, and the new contraction
in 1958, the sharpest in postwar history
except for the present one. The variability of output
is again 50 percent larger than in the middle
period.

To be sure, in the recent episode serious exogenous
shocks played a major role in the development
of prices and possibly output, although the