rates were supposed to affect, at best, the demand
for long-lived fixed investments, and the
interest elasticity was deemed to be low. Thus,
shocks were believed to produce a large response.
Finally, investment demand was seen as
capriciously controlled by "animal spirits,"
thus providing an important source of shocks.
All this justified calling for very active stabilization
policies. Furthermore, since the very
circumstances which produce a large response to
demand shocks also produce a large response to
fiscal and a small response to monetary actions,
there was a tendency to focus on fiscal policy as
the main tool to keep the economy at near full
employment.

C. The Phillips Curve

In the two decades following The General
Theory, there were a number of developments of
the Keynesian system including dynamization of
the model, the stress on taxes versus expenditures
and the balanced budget multiplier, and the
first attempts at estimating the critical parameters
through econometric techniques and models.
But for present purposes, the most important
one was the uncovering of a "stable" statistical
relation between the rate of change of wages and
the rate of unemployment, which has since come
to be known as the Phillips curve. This relation,
and its generalization by Richard Lipsey to allow
for the effect of recent inflation, won wide acceptance
even before an analytical underpinning
could be provided for it, in part because it could
account for the "puzzling" experience of 1954
and 1958, when wages kept rising despite the
substantial rise in unemployment. It also served
to dispose of the rather sterile "cost push"-
"demand pull" controversy.
In the following years, a good deal of attention
went into developing theoretical foundations for
the Phillips curve, in particular along the lines of
search models (for example, Edmund Phelps et
al.). This approach served to shed a new light on
the nature of unemployment by tracing it in the
first place to labor turnover and search time
rather than to lack of jobs as such: in a sense
unemployment is all frictional-at least in developed
countries. At the same time it clarified
how the availability of more jobs tends to reduce
unemployment by increasing vacancies and thus
reducing search time.

Acceptance of the Phillips curve relation
implied some significant changes in the Keynesian
framework which partly escaped notice until
the subsequent monetarists' attacks. Since the
rate of change of wages decreased smoothly with
the rate of unemployment, there was no longer a
unique Full Employment but rather a whole
family of possible equilibrium rates, each associated
with a different rate of inflation (and requiring,
presumably, a different long-run
growth of money). It also impaired the notion of
a stable underemployment equilibrium. A fall in
demand could still cause an initial rise in unemployment
but this rise, by reducing the growth of
wages, would eventually raise the real money
supply, tending to return unemployment to the
equilibrium rate consistent with the given longrun
growth of money.

But at the practical level it did not lessen the
case for counteracting lasting demand disturbances
through stabilization policies rather than
by relying on the slow process of wage adjustment
to do the job, at the cost of protracted unemployment
and instability of prices. Indeed,
the realm of stabilization policies appeared to expand
in the sense that the stabilization authority
had the power of choosing the unemployment
rate around which employment was to be stabilized,
though it then had to accept the associated
inflation. Finally, the dependence of wage
changes also on past inflation forced recognition
of a distinction between the short- and the longrun
Phillips curve, the latter exhibiting the longrun
equilibrium rate of inflation implied by a
maintained unemployment rate. The fact that the
long-run tradeoff between unemployment and
inflation was necessarily less favorable than the
short-run one, opened up new vistas of "enjoyit-
now, pay-later" policies, and even resulted in
an entertaining literature on the political business
cycle and how to stay in the saddle by riding
the Phillips curve (see for example, Ray Fair,
William Nordhaus).
