Second, another set of problems relates
to questions raised by James Buchanan
(1954a,b), which were partly a response to
Arrow's results, but they are momentous in
their own right.3 Pointing to "the fundamental
philosophical issues" involved in
"the idea of social rationality," Buchanan
(1954a) argued that "rationality or irrationality
as an attribute of the social group
implies the imputation to that group of an
organic existence apart from that of its individual
components" (p. 116). Buchanan was
perhaps "the first commentator to interpret
Arrow's impossibility theorem as the result
of a mistaken attempt to impose the logic of
welfare maximization on the procedures of
collective choice" (Robert Sugden, 1993 p.
1948). But in addition, he was arguing that
there was a deep "confusion surrounding
the Arrow analysis" (not just the impossibility
theorem but the entire framework used
by Arrow and his followers) which ensued
from the mistaken idea of "social or collective
rationality in terms of producing results
indicated by a social ordering" (Buchanan,
1960 pp. 88-89). We certainly have to examine
whether Buchanan's critique negates the
impossibility results, but we must also investigate
the more general issues raised by
Buchanan.4

Third, Buchanan's reasoned questioning
of the idea of "social preference" suggests,
at the very least, a need for caution in
imposing strong "consistency properties" in
social choice, but his emphasis on procedural
judgments may be taken to suggest,
much more ambitiously, that we should
abandon altogether consequence-based
evaluation of social happenings, opting instead
for a procedural approach. In its pure
form, such an approach would look for
"right" institutions rather than "good" outcomes
and would demand the priority of
appropriate procedures (including the acceptance
of what follows from these procedures)
. This approach, which is the polar
opposite of the welfare-economic tradition
based on classical utilitarianism of founding
every decision on an ordering of different
states of affairs (treating procedures just as
instruments to generate good states), has
not been fully endorsed by Buchanan himself,
but significant work in that direction
has occurred in public choice theory and in
other writings influenced by Buchanan's
work (most notably, in the important contributions
of Robert Sugden [1981, 1986]).
This contrast is particularly important in
characterizing rights in general and liberties
in particular. In the social choice literature,
these characterizations have typically been
in terms of states of affairs, concentrating
on what happens vis-a-vis what the person
wanted or chose to do. In contrast, in
the libertarian literature, inspired by the
pioneering work of Robert Nozick (1974),
and in related contributions using "gameform"
formulations (most notably, by Wulf
Gaertner, Pattanaik, and Suzumura [1992]),
rights have been characterized in procedural
terms, without referring to states of affairs.
We have to examine how deep the
differences between the disparate formulations
are, and we must also scrutinize their
respective adequacies.

Fourth, the prospects of rationality in social
decisions must be fundamentally conditional
on the nature of individual rationality.
There are many different conceptions of
rational behavior of the individual. There is,
for example, the view of rationality as canny
maximization of self-interest (the presumption
of human beings as "homo economicus,"
used in public choice theory, fits into this
framework). Arrow's (1951) formulation is
more permissive; it allows social considerations
to influence the choices people make.
Individual preferences, in this interpretation
reflect "values" in general, rather than
being based only on what Arrow calls
"tastes" (p. 23). How adequate are the respective
characterizations of individual rationality,
and through the presumption of
rational behavior (shared by most economic