Equation (3) allocates ALP growth among three
sources. The first is capital deepening, the
growth in capital input per hour worked, and
reflects the capital-labor substitution. The second
is improvement in labor quality and captures
the rising proportion of hours by workers
with higher marginal products. The third is TFP
growth, which contributes point-for-point to
ALP growth.
D. Contributions of IT Investment
Figure 5 depicts the rapid increase in the
importance of IT services, reflecting the accelerating
pace of IT price declines. In 1995-1999
the capital service price for computers fell 24.81
percent per year, compared to an increase of
36.36 percent in capital input from computers.
As a consequence, the value of computer services
grew substantially. However, the current
dollar value of computers was only 1.6 percent
of gross domestic income in 1999.
The rapid accumulation of software appears
to have different sources. The price of software
services has declined only 2.04 percent per year
for 1995-1999. Nonetheless, firms have been
accumulating software very rapidly, with real
capital services growing 16.30 percent per year.
A possible explanation is that firms respond to
computer price declines by investing in complementary
inputs like software. However, a more
plausible explanation is that the price indexes
used to deflate software investment fail to hold
quality constant. This leads to an overstatement
of inflation and an understatement of growth.
Although the price decline for communications
equipment during the period 1995-1999 is
comparable to that of software, investment in
this equipment is more in line with prices. However,
prices of communications equipment also
fail to hold quality constant. The technology of
switching equipment, for example, is similar to
that of computers; investment in this category is
deflated by a constant-quality price index developed
by BEA. Conventional price deflators are
employed for transmission gear, such as fiberoptic
cables. This leads to an underestimate of
the growth rates of investment, capital stock,
capital services, and the GDP, as well as an
overestimate of the rate of inflation.
Figures 6 and 7 highlight the rising contributions
IT outputs to U.S. economic growth. Figure
6 shows the breakdown between IT and
non-IT outputs for subperiods from 1948 to
1999, while Figure 7 decomposes the contribution
of IT into its components. Although the