Media bashing is not the answer. The
profession needs to take the lead in explaining
more clearly what is happening to the
economy, why it matters, and what the arguments
are about or ought to be about. This
means more than each of us taking a little
time to make a luncheon speech, write an op
ed piece, or appear on a talk show. It means
sustained efforts on the part of teams of
economists to figure out how to present economic
ideas more interestingly and understandably,
developing new graphics and other
teaching tools and getting feedback from
real audiences. The technology is available
and the audiences exist-the number of people
who will watch long hard-to-follow congressional
debates and hearings on cable
television is quite astonishing. We just need
to devote the kind of effort and ingenuity
that goes into explaining to audiences the
complex, fast-moving, jargon-ridden game
of football to our complex, fast-moving,
jargon-ridden game of economics.
Third, economists need to be more careful
to sort out, for ourselves and others, what
we really know from our ideological biases.
George Stigler pointed out in his presidential
address (1965) that economists beginning
with Adam Smith have not hesitated to make
strong assertions, both positive and negative,
about the effectiveness of government intervention
without offering serious evidence to
support their claims. For two hundred years,
"the chief instrument of empirical demonstration
on the economic competence of
the state has been the telling anecdote"
(pp. 11-12). In the more than two decades
since Stigler presided over our Association,
an enormous amount of useful empirical
work has been done, as he predicted it would
be, on the effectiveness of government programs,
the costs and benefits of regulation,
and so forth. Still the arguments among
economists about the merits of larger vs.
smaller government too often revolve around
anecdotes or, worse, misleading statistics
quoted out of context. My own anecdotal
evidence would lead me to believe that liberals
and conservatives are about equally
guilty.

My concern is not with economists taking
sides on policy issues or acting as advocates
of particular positions. Indeed, I think many
policy debates would be clarified if there
were more formal and informal opportunities
for economists to marshall the evidence
on each side and to examine and cross-examine
each other in front of some counterpart
of judge or jury.

We economists tend to be uncomfortable
in the role of partisans or advocates, preferring
to be seen as neutral experts whether we
are or not. Lawyers move more easily among
roles; and the best are able to serve with
distinction at different times as prosecutors,
defenders, experts, and judges. The system
works well when the roles are played competently
and the rules of evidence strictly
observed. Economists might increase their
usefulness to the policy process if they made
clear at any given moment which role they
were playing. More important, we need to
work hard to raise the standards of evidence,
to make clear to the public and the participants
in the political process what we are
reasonably sure we know and how we know
it, and where we are guessing or expressing
our preferences.
