ity in the industry's cost function, a,/yS,
which is identical with that of the individual
firm, the larger region abcd, and the infinite
region aleph beth....
Before showing why this is so we must
pause to note the implications of the ex-
ercise. For it means that even a relatively
small region of flatness in the A C curve of
the individual firm, that is, of linear homo-
geneity in its total cost function, eliminates
the bulk of the existence problem for oligop-
oly equilibrium in a contestable market. The
problem does not arise for outputs nearer to
the origin than Ym because such outputs are
supplied most efficiently by a monopoly
which is not required to price at marginal
cost in a contestable market equilibrium. The
problem also does not arise for any industry
output greater than 3ym in this case, because
everywhere beyond that marginal cost pric-
ing yields zero profits. There are two rela-
tively narrow regions in which no equi-
librium is, indeed, possible, but here we may
conjecture that the vicissitudes of disequi-
librium will cause shifts in the demand rela-
tionships as changing prices and changing
consumption patterns affect tastes, and so
the industry will ultimately happen upon an
equilibrium position and remain there until
exogenous disturbances move it away. Thus
we end up with an oligopoly equilibrium
whose prices, profits, and other attributes are
determined without benefit of the conjec-
tural variation, reaction functions, and the
other paraphernalia of standard oligopoly
analysis.
To complete this discussion of oligopoly
equilibrium in a contestable market, it only
remains for me to explain why the regions of
linear homogeneity in the industry's cost
function are as depicted in Figure 7. The
answer is straightforward. Let C(y) be the
firm's total cost function for which we have
assumed for expository simplicity that in the
interval from ym to I lym along each and
every ray, total cost grows exactly pro-
portionately with output. Then two firms can
produce 2ym at the same unit cost, and three
firms can produce 3ym at that same unit cost
for the given output bundle, etc. But by
exactly the same argument, the two firms
together, each producing no more than 1 ' '