people have in mind when they list efficiencyoriented
policies as essential ingredients of a
program promoting economic growth. It is
policies of this type that give the right signals
to the CEOs and the managers down the line,
that take away trammels that impede their
quest for real cost reductions, and that create
an environment in which Schumpeter's process
of "creative destruction" can work its
wonders.

APPENDIX ON METHODOLOGY

The vision of the growth process presented
in this paper leads one almost inevitably to
some methodological twists-twists which, if
they are not new, at least differ in significant
ways from what I take to be the most common
practice in breaking economic growth down
into components.

(a) To measure the real rate of return to
capital, one must express the numerator (real
dollars of retum) and the denomiinator (the
capital stock) in the same units. The most efficient
way to do this is to measure both output
(value added) and the capital stock in units of
the GDP deflator. That way one is sure that the
outputs of all the subaggregates in the economy
add up to the GDP, and one also satisfies
the requirement that the capital and return be
measured in the same units. This is also the
way cash flows would be deflated in a standard,
ex post project evaluation. When this is
done at the aggregate level the contribution of
capital to growth is (p + 5) AK where p is an
aggregate rate of return to capital, 6 the depreciation
rate (including obsolescence), and AK
the net increment to the capital stock in the
period in question. At a subaggregate level, the
contribution of capital to growth in activity j
is (pj + bj) AKj. At both levels, we find that
high rates of return are an important component
of most successful growth episodes.
(b) To capture the great diversity of the labor
factor, we would like to have a very fine
breakdown of labor into categories (indexed
by i). The labor contribution is then liwiALi,
where wi represents the real wage of category
i and ALi the change in hours worked by category
i. Since the number of relevant categories
of labor is huge, any such breakdown is
difficult, and gets more difficult as one disaggregates
from economy to sector to branch to
industry and to firm. This Gordian knot can be
cut by a simple assumption, similar to what is
done in most countries to convert residential
construction to real terms. There, one builds a
price index of a "standard house" p*, and
then obtains a quantum of construction C* by
dividing total construction outlays by the price
of the standard house. In the resulting aggregate,
each individual residence (i) gets attributed
a quantum of housing equal to Pi Ip */ In
this work I define a standard wage w*, which
I assign to "standard labor" or "raw labor."
The excess of anybody's actual wage over w *
is attributed to human capital. The returns to
natural ability, as well as to formal education,
training, and experience belong there, under
this interpretation. High returns due to a distorted
wage structure are not appropriately
attributable to human capital, but the methodology
would nonetheless be correct in attributing
to the affected labor a marginal
productivity that is measured by the distorted
high wage.

The "labor contribution" as measured by
w*AL* is equal to w* (Q S(wi /w *) AL1 +
iLi A(w /w*). The second term will be zero
if the structure of relative wages remains constant,
or even if the weighted average premium
does not change. Any changes in the weighted
average premium will cause the calculated residual
to be different from those calculated by
other methods.

The "two-deflator method" is characterized
by the use of a single numeraire-deflator (say,
the GDP deflator), by the treatment of the
quantum of output as value added divided by
the numeraire-deflator, and by the use of a
standard wage w * and a quantum of labor L *
equal to the wages bill divided by w *. This is
the method used by Beyer (1996), Robles
(1997), and Torre (1997) in their work reported
in this paper.

It goes without saying that the two-deflator
method is rough. But it is also tremendously
robust and easily applied. I think of it as being
really designed for use at the firm level, where
very commonly we can get data in value
added, on gross investment, and on the wages
bill, but know nothing (from standard sources)
about the quantum of output or about the number
of total hours worked (or even the total
number of employees used). This opening of
wide new vistas, of huge new data sets, is what