pencils. In the incentive-compatible Vickery
double auction, successful buyers pay vK+ 1,
and successful sellers receive vK, with the market
operator covering the difference. The number
of pencils J initially allocated to the K
highest value participants has a binomial distribution,
b(K, KIN). The volume in the efficient
auction is then K - J, which has mean K(N -
K)IN and variance K2(N - K)/N2.
In the experiment, the expected volume is
86.25, with a standard deviation of 6.56. The
actual market-clearing price was vK+ 1 = K =  35, and the number of market-clearing transactions
was 32. Under the hypothesis of no endowment
effect, the probability of 32 or fewer  transactions is on the order of 10-16. The median
offer to buy was 10 cents and the median
offer to sell was 100 cents. A runs test confirms
(T = 12.5) that buyers and sellers do not have
the same value distribution. Thus, there is a
strong, trade-suppressing endowment effect,
generated instantaneously by a random allocation
of pencils. Either tastes are changing endogenously,
with quick habituation to the status
quo, or agoraphobia is real-consumers find
trade an edgy experience, instinctively mistrust
the market, and resist trading for small gains.
Consumer preferences among risky prospects-
lotteries-show a number of behavioral
anomalies that appear to be related to the endowment
effect. In summary, consumers appear
to evaluate lotteries as changes from a reference
point that may be sensitive to framing, and to
exhibit asymmetric loss aversion in which
losses loom larger than gains, with consumers
displaying risk aversion for gains and risk
seeking for losses, a certainty effect in which
there is a pure preference for sure things over
lotteries, and a prospect effect in which the
probabilities of low-probability events are overestimated.
One of the consequences of these
effects is that consumers will often refuse to
take any share of either side of an offered lottery,
a result consistent with the observed paucity
of real-world wagers. An additional reason
that individuals are suspicious of lotteries, and
often avoid them, is the superstitious belief that
there are hidden causal forces at work, interventions
that place the lottery in ambagious relationship
to the rest of life.
There is experimental evidence that endowment
effects are attenuated when traders are
experienced (see Mikhail Myagkov and Plott,
1997; John A. List, 2004). Thus, the observed
paucity of trades in lotteries may occur primarily
for novel events and inexperienced traders.
These facts are consistent with a proposition
that learning by observing and by doing may be
effective in selecting rational market behavior
rules in arenas with sufficient repetitiveness to
allow these effects to operate.
B. Calculation and Processing
The ideal rational consumer has the computational
power to value complex commodities
and consistently handle risk, discounting, and
option calculations, and the logical clarity to
work through the consequences of decisions
and optimize choices. In practice, both computational
and logical skills are limited. This may
be inconsequential for repeated short-lived
choices, such as picking out your breakfast cereal
or deciding when to change lanes, but these
limitations become critical for unfamiliar, not
easily reversed choices, such as occupation, job
change, house, automobile, children. The deficiencies
are most severe when choice involves
small, ambagious risks in the distant future, as
in the case of smoking and other addictive activities,
a perfect storm in which distortion of
perceptions of time, risk, and affect combine
with difficult computations of options and contingencies.
Table 3 lists some of the effects that
impede accurate processing and maximization
of preferences.
A first limitation is that we miss many choice
opportunities, and are barely conscious of others
we make almost automatically. Driving an
automobile is an example. We may ignore opportunities
to change lanes or pass, or may
decide to do so without conscious thought. Such
decisions are usually sensible; we develop habits
that work well and save scarce attention
time. They may not, however, be optimal. In
particular, lack of attention may lead to procrastination
and default choices that are, after the
fact, clearly not optimal.
I think it is remarkable on balance how well
most people function in markets, even people
with little academic aptitude. This may be beTABLE