. .. [T]he world may have its reasons for
being non-Walrasian.
Robert Solow
The vast majority of our profession share
a common view on most microeconomic
policy issues. But we are widely split over
macroeconomic theory and policy. Our concensus
on micro issues arises from a shared
model of how markets work in the long run.
Our division on macro issues stems from a
number of reasons, the emphasis on which
has shifted over the years. In recent times the
main disagreement has centered on how
markets perform in the short run. In particular,
we cannot agree on why nominal wages
are sticky on the face of aggregate demand
shocks. The traditional view argues that
wages are structurally sticky. The new classical
macroeconomists argue that wages are
fundamentally flexible. But the rational expectations
of economic agents, grounded on
past experience with attempts at employment-
supporting monetary policy, have produced
the observed wage stickiness. Introduction
of a changed policy regime, based on
a stable growth path for the money supply or
some similar rule, would-so the argument
goes-eventually change the pattern of expectations
and eliminate the stickiness.
A large and rapidly expanding body of
recent research on implicit contracts, principal-
agent relationships, and related subjects
has begun to flesh out our knowledge of
why wages are sticky. Almost universally the
implicit contract and related literature concludes
that optimal behavior implies a good
deal less wage flexibility in the face of changes
in the marginal revenue product of labor
than would occur in the spot auction markets
of the Walrasian model. But this literature
deals with the stickiness of real and relative
wages in response to shocks of various kinds.
It seems to have little to say about the macroeconomic
stickiness of nominal wages. A
micro theory of real wage stickiness may
help explain the difficulty of adjusting to
sudden large changes in aggregate supply
conditions like the two oil shocks of the
1970's. But the more familiar problems facing
macroeconomic theory and policy have
to do with the ability of the economy to
adjust to aggregate demand shocks where
nominal wage stickiness is a major barrier to
successful adjustment. And here the important
question is what, if anything, does
the new research imply for the behavior of
nominal wages? It is to this subject I want to
give my attention.
A road map will be helpful. After summarizing
the existing literature, the first
section concentrates on relative wage adjustments,
and argues that under optimal
arrangements for the determination of wages,
relative wages while not rigid will be sticky.
They will adjust only gradually to relative
changes in the conditions facing individual
firms. The paper then argues that contrary to
general opinion, relative wage stickiness necessarily
produces aggregate nominal wage
stickiness; if wages move sluggishly in response
to the relative conditions facing individual
firms, they will move sluggishly in
response to aggregate nominal shocks. Several
mechanisms that might produce a flexible
wage response to nominal shocks, given sticky
relative wages, are considered and rejected
-various forms of indexing and rational
expectations. Finally the "external" nature
of the gains from nominal wage flexibility
is invoked against the criticism that attributing
cyclical unemployment to nominal wage
stickiness implies nonrational behavior on