and agoraphobia. Third, consumers may, out of
pure self-interest, engage in mutually beneficial
reciprocity, simple when the acts are synchronous,
involving more complex elements of reputation
and trust when they are not. Pursuing
comparative advantage, with division of labor
and trade, is a form of reciprocity. Fourth, they
may engage in genetic altruism, making choices
that are in the interest of their progeny rather
than themselves as individuals. Fifth, they
may exhibit altruistic behavior that does not
obviously serve their personal or genetic selfinterest,
such as incurring costs to sanction
greedy behavior.
A. Information
One major way sociality works is through
transmission of information, learning by imitation
rather than learning by doing. People
constantly make interpersonal comparisons,
judging the desirability of options from the apparent
satisfaction and advice of others. While
personal experience is the proximate determinant
of the utility of familiar objects, and may
be extrapolated to similar objects, our primary
sources of information on new objects come
from others, through observation, advice, and
association. McFadden and Kenneth E. Train
(1996) show that in innovation games with uncertain
payoffs, it may pay to wait, and learn by
observing rather than learn by doing. Charles F.
Manski (1991) has explored the possibility that
individuals faced with dynamic stochastic decision
problems that pose immense computational
challenges may simply look to others to infer
valuation functions to be used to judge the future
payoff of current acts, or to infer satisfactory
policies. An objection to such copycat
behavior is that it fails to take account of the
individual's idiosyncratic tastes, and correcting
this quickly gets the individual back into
the computational difficulties that imitation
was intended to circumvent. But if tastes as well
as perceptions are modified socially, the relevance
and value of the lessons from others
increases.
Economic demographer Hans Peter Kohler
(2001) has investigated the effect of word-ofmouth
communication from friends on choice
of contraceptive. He studies Korean peasant
women, who have access to relatively little public
information on efficacy, costs, and side effects
of new contraceptives. Choices within
villages show little diversity, but there is substantial,
persistent diversity across villages.
This pattern is not explained by income, education,
or price differences. Word-of-mouth
communication from friends was found to be
the important explanation of most women's
choices. Lack of inter-village mobility explained
multiple equilibria, with persistent intervillage
differences. Thus, some apparent taste
heterogeneity is due to the boundedly rational
practice of imitation in balkanized social networks.
The implications of social information
networks for economic policymakers is something
that is part of the bible of marketingproduct
launch and penetration is critical to
tipping network opinion and ensuring success.
Serious education of network information leaders
through demonstration and experience is
important not only for promotion of a product,
but also for its design.
In addition to providing information, social
networks may discipline the behavior of members
through consensus on social norms, accountability
for choices, and sanctions for
behavior that violates norms.3 The individual
gains from affiliation with such networks if
imitation and conformity save energy, if the
"expectation that one will be called upon to
justify one's beliefs, feelings, or actions, to others"
improves decision-making, and if approval
is itself a source of pleasure. The classical idea
of herd mentality is that social animals find it
easier and more comfortable to adhere to a
group, accept group roles, and mimic group
behavior than to act independently. Accountability
reinforces herd mentality in fixed groups,
and promotes safety in numbers. Individual
membership may be voluntary, as in the pellaton
of tightly packed riders in a bicycle race,
with riders tightly clustered and constrained
in order to save energy in preparation for
"breakaways."
3 See Gary S. Becker (1976), Francis Bloch et al. (2005),
Alan P. Hamlin (1991), and Matthijs Poppe (2005).