explains in good part why inflation is so
stubborn even in the face of overly restrictive
monetary-fiscal policy and rapidly
mounting unemployment and slack in the
economy. It is the sharp run-up in relative
prices of food, fuel, and imported goodscoupled
with the downward rigidities of
wages and prices that is the key to most
of our stagflationary malaise today.
These downward rigidities are a striking
example of the way in which economic
solutions create their own problems and
move the economist relentlessly from one
new frontier to another. Once macroeconomics
gave governments the know-how
and tools of modern demand-management
to avoid depression, and once the public
caught on that even recessions are essentially
man-made-chiefly by That Man in
the White House, whoever he is, together
with the Congress and the Federal Reserve
Board-it became part of the politics of
survival to hold employment high and
keep recessions in check. Absent the fears
of mass unemployment and prolonged
recession, the risks of not cutting prices
and not accepting lower wages are minimized.
Having put the Great Depression
of the 1930's far behind us, will we therefore
have to live with the Great Inflation
of the 1970's?

Essentially, the economist answers that,
given the ratchet behavior of wages and
prices, the price level can only float upward
to accommodate the massive relative
price increases of oil, grains, certain raw
materials, and imported goods. These
sharp changes in the composition of supply
touch off reverberating price increases
throughout the economy as prices in the
scarce-supply sectors become costs in the
less-scarce ones. The reverberations go on
-in substantial part independent of the
state of aggregate demand and hence of
monetary and fiscal policy-until the
prices of the initiating goods have risen
sufficiently farther than prices in general
to accomplish the necessary realignment
of relative prices. This is the process going
on now. It takes time, but not forever. It
has much to do with double-digit inflation,
but it does not condemn us to Weimar
Republic inflation.

Solow (1975) reminds us that the supply-
shift phenomenon bears a close relationship
to the demand-shift analysis of
the creeping inflation of the mid-1950's.
At that time, the parallel process was
touched off by an investment boom that
put excess demand pressures on capital
goods industries even when there was no
excess aggregate demand in the economy.
Given the downward rigidity and costoriented
nature of wages and prices in
areas of excess market power, the price
level had to float upward to accommodate
those relative price changes (see Schultze
(1959)).

John Dunlop and other economists have
emphasized that there is a closely related
phenomenon on the wage side known as
"scale wages" or "wage relativities" or
even a "just wage" (see Robert Hall and
Michael Piore). If the relative wage scale
is thrown out of kilter by an outsized
wage settlement in one industry, the others
will writhe, twist, and turn until the old
relationships are reestablished. There is
only one way the wage structure can move
to accommodate this process: Up. Again,
the process burns itself out only when a
new equilibrium has been established on a
higher plateau.

The policy implications of the supplyshift,
demand-shift, and wage-shift insights
are reasonably clear. One is the
limited scope of repressive monetary-fiscal
policy in coping with this process. Another
is that the key to a successful wageprice
policy for these circumstances is
to establish and effectuate norms for the
pace-setters and thus thwart the wagewage
and price-price spirals and the interacting
wage-price spiral. Once the process