II. The Challenge of Choice
Agoraphobia (ayopa` + 6f3o(, literally  "fear of the marketplace") Fear of leaving
a safe place, fear of being in situations
from which escape might be difficult or
embarrassing; fear of losing control in a
public place such as a restaurant or shopping
mall.
Psychology Today
Studies of consumer perceptions, motivations,
and behavior give a complex picture of
self-interest and the determinants of well-being.
Consumers often find choice overwhelming,
and decision-making uncomfortable. In the
words of a Dutch proverb, "He who has choice
has trouble." We routinely use procrastination,
precommitments, habit, imitation, social norms,
defaults, and superstitions to avoid confronting
choice. We pass up trading opportunities, particularly
in unfamiliar situations. We are suspicious
of trading partners, and fearful of
deception, exploitation, or unfair treatment. In
short, we exhibit various degrees of agoraphobia,
a term that means literally "fear of the
marketplace," adapted by psychiatrists to mean
fear of leaving a safe place for a situation from
which it might be difficult or embarrassing to
escape. Reflect on the major decisions in your
own lives-choice of college, occupation, car,
house, and spouse-and in most cases you will
feel you made the right choice, but will recall
the choice process itself as an emotional, stressful
experience.
By rational calculation and accumulated experience,
we benefit from choice. Then, why do
consumers fear markets and find choice troubling?
First, there is market risk. Forget the
antiseptic, well-lighted budget sets and markets
of economics textbooks. Real-life markets are
rough, murky, tumultuous places where commodity
attributes shift, supply is uncertain,
prices are volatile, and information is imperfect.
Caveat emptor prevails, and caution and calculation
are vital. The sure-footed may thrive, but
their success may come in part from the failures
of the less experienced and nimble. Second,
there are personal risks, including the risk of
misperception and miscalculation, of misunderstanding
the available alternatives, of misread-  ing one's own tastes, of yielding to a moment's
whim and regretting it afterward. Finally, there
is social risk, the interactions between people
that trade requires; the stress of information
acquisition, search, and bargaining; the stress of
dealing with pushy or deceptive sales tactics;
and the risk of being embarrassed or defrauded.
How do consumers deal with these risks?
And what is it about these risks that leads to
broad biases against market-based resource allocation?
Perhaps such inference is rooted in
human psychology. Consumers often have the
perceptual illusion that other freeway lanes or
supermarket lines move faster than their own,
because the occasions on which this occurs are
particularly noticeable and irritating. Similarly,
they may have the perceptual illusion that they
are particularly unlucky, or subject to discrimination
and exploitation in markets, because
their bad experiences stand out. Markets that
work well for you are invisible, those that don't
are a source of frustration and grief.
III. The Consumer's Mind
What if everything is an illusion and nothing
exists? In that case, I definitely overpaid
for my carpet.
Woody Allen
To understand how consumers deal with market,
personal, and social risks, it is useful to
study how they think, and the social context of
thought and trade. While the mutual benefit of
trade is the aspect emphasized in economics,
trade is also a contest, with the issues, emotions,
and stresses that competitions entail: Is the playing
field level and the referee fair? Will my
opponent play by the rules? Can I match her
knowledge and skills? The competition itself,
not just the outcome, becomes a source of pleasure
or pain. Trade is part of the way that
humans as social animals define and defend
themselves, a process that is both cognitive and
visceral.
Mind and trade are linked in human prehistory.
I relate an evolutionary tale, adapted from
Matthew Ridley's book The Origins of Virtue.
A few million years ago, the great apes established
family groups that were successful in the
essentials-obtaining food, protecting them-