hyperinflation. We find the Federal Reserve
System poised to slam on the brakes at the
first sign of a resurgence of inflation, a
posture not calculated to inspire investment
in durable capital.

On the political side, we see the House
voting by a substantial majority in favor of a
constitutional amendment to require a balanced
budget, fortunately falling short of
the required two-thirds. This was done in
spite of the fact that the nominal budget as
currently computed is not a valid measure
of any significant economic quantity. The
nominal deficit would be reduced by selling
the Pentagon to a life insurance company
subject to a long-term lease-back and repurchase
option; this at least would do no
harm, unlike the sale of natural resources to
private exploiters which would actually decrease
the real heritage handed down to the
future, on the pretext of reducing the transfer
requirements embodied in the national
debt.

II. Recycling Savings Through Public
Capital Formation

From a classical standpoint, of course,
the difficulty is that no account is taken
of the distinction between transactions on
current account and on capital account. If
AT&T, General Motors, and households
had been constrained to operate under the
restrictions of the proposed balanced-budget
amendment, we would now have far fewer
telephones, automobiles, and houses. A
capital budget, with a vast expansion of
government capital outlays on roads,
bridges, research, education, and the like,
financed by borrowing, might go a considerable
way toward improving the unemployment
situation. But there is no assurance
that it could do the whole job.
III. Eliminating the Corporation Income Tax
Other classical approaches to improving
the unemployment situation exist but have
their own political opposition and in any
case are too weak to make much of a dent
in a very large need. One such measure
would be the abolition of the corporation
income tax, which is by far the most serious
hurdle in the way of private capital formation
of a kind requiring equity funding. Unlike
the capital-gains tax, the corporate income
tax is a tax largely above or before the
market, requiring a rate of return on investment
sufficient to cover the corporation tax
and leave a rate of return after tax comparable
to other investments, whereas the
capital-gains tax operates largely as a reduction
in the return to the investor after or
below the market, comparable to the reduction
of net income to the taxpayer resulting
from the personal income tax on other income.
In addition, the corporation tax
causes inefficient allocation of investment
between equity-type and loan-type investments;
it encourages thin equity and resulting
bankruptcies and reorganizations, and it
lubricates takeovers and mergers of dubious
intrinsic merit.

Reduction of the tax on capital gains, on
the other hand, might actually depress economic
activity if the additional savings out
of the tax reduction were to exceed the
additional capital formation induced. This is
the more likely in that most of the tax
reduction is likely to be saved immediately,
whereas the inducement to capital formation
is in terms of a tax reduction in a
relatively remote future, subject to legislative
vicissitudes. At best, special treatment
of capital gains greatly increases the complexity
of the tax law and diverts investment
flows from their most efficient use. There is
nothing to indicate that investments likely
to yield returns in forms defined by the tax
code as capital gains will have any superior
social value: gains from land speculation, in
particular, add nothing to the real availability
of resources.

As for the corporate income tax, in spite
of its many defects from the standpoint of
economic efficiency, it has enormous political
popularity due to the fact that nearly
everyone thinks that it is paid by someone
else. Indeed economists have differed widely
in their assignment of the "burden" of the
tax, owing to a failure to specify, or even to
consider, the macroeconomic policy changes
necessarily involved in a change in the tax.
Unlike most other taxes, the corporation tax