rates). To turn these percentages into dollar
amounts of real cost saving over the period,
one multiplies them by base-period real GDP
[col. (4)]. The results are shown in colunm
(2). Columns (3) and (5) are the cumulative
sums of columns (2) and (4), respectively.
Working with these figures one can make
statements like those at the bottom of the
table-i.e., the top 10 percent of industries
accounted for 30 percent of total real cost reduction;
the top 22 percent of industries (measured
by initial value added) accounted for
more than half of total real cost reduction.
Readers will notice that at the foot of each
column in the table is an entry refering to 18
additional industries, which together accounted
for only 10 percent of the total TFP contribuition,
while their combined share of initial output was
almost 60 percent of the total.
Using the analogy with yeast and mushrooms,
the results of my calculations using the
Kendrick-Grossman data pointed very clearly to
a "nmushrooms" interpretation. Not only were
the contributions to RCR highly conicentrated in
a relatively few industries, these industries also
were very different as one shifted from decade
span to decade span. The top four branches in
percentage of real cost reduction during 1948-
1958 were Communications, Public Utilities,
Farming, and Miscellaneous Manufacturing. In
1958-1967 they were Lumber, Railroad Transport,
Textile Mills, and Electrical Machinery. In
1967-1976 they were Finance, Insurance &
Real Estate, Apparel, Communications, and
Chemicals. Only Communications appears twice
among these 12 listings.
Now to my mind, this already brings
evidence to bear on a number of possible hypotheses
concerning the nature of TFP
improvement. Certainly some ways of interpreting
a generalized externality due to improved
education would be hard to justify
using evidence like this. Strong links of the
residual term to R&D expenditures' would
suggest a high degree of persistence among the
leaders in TFP improvement. So also (probably)
would economies of scale associated with
the scale either of the firm or of the industry.
Such economies are not likely to jump wildly
around from one industry to the next, from period
to period. One would expect them to embody
characteristics of the productive process
that would be relatively stable over time;
hence they should show a reasonably high degree
of persistence, over time, in terms of the
TFP experience of particular industries.
No economist can look at Table 2 without
thinking of its close analogy with a Lorenz
curve. That, indeed, was the next step I took
in trying to represent the degree of concentration
of real cost reduction. Figure 1 (drawn
from Edgar Robles, 1997), shows the quasiLorenz
curves for a 20-industry breakdown of
the U.S. manufacturing sector over four successive
five-year periods.
What strikes one immediately about Figure
1 is the characteristic "overshooting." I have
marked withi the first vertical line the point
where the rising curve crosses 100 percent on
the vertical axis. The interpretation is that in
1970-1975 the cumulative real cost reduction
of just 25 percent of manufacturing industries
(measured by initial value added) was equal
to the total RCR for manufacturing as a whole.
After that there are other industries producing
another 40 percent of the total, but their contribution
is offset by still other industries with
negative RCR during the period.
Corresponding to the 25-percent figure for
1975, we have around 12 percent for 1975-
1980, 48 percent for 1980-1985, and 40 percent
for 1985-1991. These are the fractions of
manufacturing industry which by themselves
were able to account for the full amount of real
cost reduction during the respective period, in
manufacturing industry as a whole.
The second vertical line in each panel of
Figure 1 marks the maximum point of the
curve. The interpretation is that about 64 percent
of industries enjoyed real cost reduction
during 1970-1975, with the remaining 36 percent
suffering real cost increases (declining
TFP). For the subsequent periods, the corresponding
figures are 65(35) percent, 78(22)
percent, and 82 ( 18 ) percent. Here the first figure
is the percent of industries enjoying real
cost reductions; the figures in parentheses represent
those experiencing declining TFP.
Some interest attaches to the ordinate of the
maximum point on each curve. In the first period,
TFP growth ended up accounting for close
' For a review of the current status of analysis of R&D
expenditures and their impact on economic growth see
Griliches (1994).