accumulation of historical and current
biomedical studies on the trends in health, longevity,
and human physiology, combined with
controlled studies of animal populations, are
leading some evolutionary biologists to place
increasing emphasis on plasticity in human aging
(Michael R. Rose, 1991; Caleb E. Finch,
1997; Hillard Kaplan, 1997). The term "plasticity"
refers to the widely varying pattern of
aging within species and the ability of the
length of the life span to be affected by environmental
factors, some of which may operate
over several generations (cf., Kenneth W.
Wachter and Finch, 1997).
The search for better ways to forecast longterm
trends in health-care costs and in pension
costs has made it essential for economists to
understand the underlying physiological, nutritional,
and epidemiological factors that affect
the changing demand for health care and
retirement. Forecasts about health-care costs
are obviously related to assumptions about
changes in both life expectancy and agespecific
morbidity rates. If current morbidity
rates at older ages are presumed to remain constant
or to increase over the next 30 to 50
years, and if life expectancy is also presumed
to increase, then national health-care costs become
astronomic. However, if one takes account
of the recent declines in age-specific
disability rates, then the share of health-care
costs in GDP might remain constant (Kenneth
G. Manton et al., 1997b; Manton et al., 1998),
provided the demand for health services
(given disability rates) does not increase. If,
however, the income elasticity of the demand
for health is greater than one, then as income
increases, the share of income that is spent on
health care could increase even if disability
rates decline (see Fogel, 1997). It is quite possible
for the demand for medical interventions
to increase, even though age-specific morbidity
rates decline, for one or more of the following
reasons: shifts in the age structure of
the population toward ages with high morbidity
rates; improvements in inedical interventions
for a wide range of chronic conditions
which alleviate symptoms but do not cure; the
replacement of current disease-specific standards
of care by new ones based on improved technologies
that are much more expensive than
those replaced; the elimination of current age restrictions
on such expensive procedures as organ
replacements (cf., David M. Cutler and Ellen
Meara, 1998; Alan M. Garber et al., 1998).
The complexity of the underlying issues in
the economics and biodemography of aging
has led to a significant shift away from crosssectional
data sets and to a concentration on
longitudinal data sets. The earliest of the major
longitudinal studies sponsored by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), the Framingham
Heart Study, began in 1950 and was focused
on the causes and treatment of coronary heart
disease rather than on the economics and biodemography
of aging. The Retirement History
Survey (RHS) followed a cohort of men and
women aged 58 to 63 from 1969 to 1979 and
then was suspended. Although not initially
planned as a longitudinal study, it became the
mainstay of retirement research during the
1980's. Linked to the social security file on
covered earnings, it provided important insights
into the labor-force and retirement behavior
of older workers.
In 1990, the National Institute of Aging
launched a new Health and Retirement Survey
(HRS) focused on the cohort born between
1931 and 1941, and aimed at collecting a much
wider set of variables than covered by the
older RHS. The new HRS collected numerous
measures of health (including cognitive ability)
, taxable earnings, job characteristics,
hours of work, job turnover, family characteristics,
pensions, health insurance, and ownership
of an array of assets including real estate,