understanding economic choice behavior. It already
seems to confirm and explain, however,
that brain structure and chemistry are behind
some systematic anomalies in economic behavior,
particularly failures to form perceptions and
pursue self-interest consistently when confronted
with choices involving remote, uncertain,
or ambiguous outcomes, failures to recall
or anticipate in full color the sensations that
outcomes produce, and the quick adaptation to
circumstance, the hedonic treadmill.
IV. Personal Risk
What information consumes is rather obvious:
it consumes the attention of its
recipients. Hence a wealth of information
creates a poverty of attention, and a need
to allocate that attention efficiently among
the overabundance of information sources
that might consume it.
Herbert Simon, 1971
A large literature from behavioral economics
and psychology finds that people
often make inconsistent choices, fail to
learn from experience, exhibit reluctance
to trade, base their own satisfaction on
how their situation compares with others',
and in other ways depart from the standard
model of the rational economic
agent. If people display bounded rationality
when it comes to maximizing
utility, then their choices do not necessarily
reflect their "true" preferences,
and an exclusive reliance on choices to
infer what people desire loses some of
its appeal.
Daniel Kahneman and
Alan Krueger, forthcoming
The biological evidence that the human brain
is complex and layered, more an imperfect
meeting of minds than an optimizing computer,
follows and supports behavioral evidence from
cognitive psychology and experimental economics
showing that humans are, well, all too
human in the ways they retrieve and evaluate
information, and process decisions.2 In over-
view, these studies suggest that homo economicus-
sovereign in tastes, steely-eyed and
point-on in perception of risk, and relentless in
maximization of happiness-is a rare species.
While consumer behavior in familiar market
settings may have these characteristics, when
we approach the consumer from a different angle,
asking direct and unusual questions about
beliefs or values, or offering novel products and
services, we find alarming variations from the
story of consistent advancement of self-interest.
All these apparently normal consumers are revealed
to be shells filled with heuristics that
have been shaped by evolutionary selection and
experience. These heuristics often work. For
example, two of my rules which seem successful
are: "Never buy a Rolex from a street
vender" and "Never accept an e-mail offer to
transfer millions of dollars to my bank account.
" However, throw the consumer a curve
ball, in the form of a question that fails to fit a
standard heuristic for market response, and the
essential "irrationality" of the organism is revealed.
For most economists, this is the plot line
for "Stepford Consumers," a real horror movie.
Even if this bleak portrayal is true, however, it
does not mean that policy conclusions based on
consumer rationality are wrong, only that the
consumer may need to be coaxed and wheedled
into responding to market choices with sufficient
diligence to approximate rational promo-
tion of self-interest.
Most of the evidence on consumer decisionmaking
comes from laboratory experiments.
Economists reviewing the experimental evidence
sometimes comment that markets punish
inconsistencies, and consumers learn to avoid
them. They then conclude that while these flaws
may appear in experiments, they are not important
for economic behavior. This may be true in
repeated, familiar market settings where the
conduct and rewards of others provide good
2 Edited volumes that survey this subject include Kah-
neman et al. (1999), Kahneman and Amos Tversky (2000),
Thomas D. Gilovich (2002), John H. Kagen and Alvin E.
Roth (1995), George Loewenstein et al. (2003), and Charles
R. Plott (forthcoming). See also Charles Bellemare et al.
(2005), Ronald Bosman et al. (2005), Camerer (1999),
Camerer and Thaler (1995), Donald Green et al. (1998),
Teck H. Ho et al. (forthcoming), Michael D. Hurd et al.
(1998), and Olaf Johansson-Stenman and Hector Svedsater
(2003).