The content of presidential addresses to
this Association provides a fine example of
a random variable with a high variance. It
might even be a good subject for econometric
analysis; the variation might be
explained in terms of the economic conditions
of the moment, previous intellectual
investments, or even, for boldly interdisciplinary
analysis, the psychological states
or class origins of the speakers or the
audience. But no doubt captious theorists
like myself will object that the endogenous
variable is not cardinally measurable and
probably not even ordinally measurable;
tougher-minded econometricians will worry
about collinearity in the predetermined
variables; and practical-minded policy
analysts will see no discernible effect on
the gross national product, the price level,
or the balance of payments through effects
on either fiscal policy or the stock of
money. The last group, the policy-oriented,
are perhaps the least accurate; at least
according to Keynes, the effect of ideas on
policy is dominant, though the lag may be
as variable as and a good deal longer than
that of the stock of money on money gross
national product.
It is now more fashionable than it used
to be for statisticians to be told to take a
good look at their data before fitting
models. Taking presidential addresses as
our data, we find most frequently a review
of the speaker's main research concerns
but also expressions of methodological or
ethical concerns, historical surveys of varying
degrees of erudition and humor, and,
least frequently, new points of view on signifi-
cant problems of economics.
I am taking a somewhat different tack
today; it will be an expression of discontents
and expectations. As I shall try to
argue, the uncertainties about economics
are rooted in our need for a better understanding
of the economics of uncertainty;
our lack of economic knowledge is, in good
part, our difficulty in modelling the ignorance
of the economic agent.
Critical aspects of this need for reorientation
of theory have been recognized by
many scholars in the last quarter-century
and particularly in the last decade. I view
my remarks today as a summary and perspective
on a widely shared development
of thinking.
The starting point of discussion must
still be the much-abused neoclassical
theory. No really cohesive alternative
which aspires to the same level of completeness
exists. The neoclassical model is
founded on two concepts, which are considerably
different in nature. One is the
notion of the individual economic agent,
whose behavior is governed by a criterion
of optimization under constraints which
are partly peculiar to the agent, such as
production functions, and partly terms of
trade with the economic system as a whole.