legitimately owned property). But the possibility
of having unacceptable consequences
has to be addressed by any such procedural
system. What if the results are dreadful for
many, or even all?

Indeed, it can be shown that even gigantic
famines can actually take place in an
economy that fulfills all the libertarian rights
and entitlements specified in the Nozick
system.33 It is, thus, particularly appropriate
that Nozick (1974) makes exceptions to
consequence-independence in cases where
the exercise of these rights would lead to
"catastrophic moral horrors."34 Because of
this qualification, consequences are made to
matter after all, and underlying this concession
is Nozick's good sense (similar to
Buchanan's) that a procedural system of
entitlements that happens to yield catastrophic
moral horrors (we have to have some
consensus on what these are) would
be-and should be-ethically unacceptable.
However, once- consequences are
brought into the story, not only is the purity
of a consequence-independent system lost,
but also the issue of deciding on the relative
importance of "right rules" and "good consequences"
is forcefully reestablished.
I turn now to the other side of the dichotomy:
can we have sensible outcome
judgments in a totally procedure-independent
way? Classical utilitarianism does indeed
propose such a system, but it is hard
to be convinced that we can plausibly judge
any given utility distribution ignoring altogether
the process that led to that distribution
(attaching, for example, no intrinsic
importance whatever to whether a particular
utility redistribution is caused by charity,
or taxation, or torture).35
This recognition of the role of processes
is not, in fact, hostile to social choice theory,
since there is nothing to prevent us
from seeing the description of processes as
a part of the consequent states generated
by them.36 If action A is performed, then
"action A has been done" must be oneindeed,
the most elementary-consequence
of that event. If Mr. John Major were to
wish not merely that he should be reelected
as Prime Minister, but that he should be
"reelected fairly" (I am not, of course, insinuating
that any such preference has been
expressed by Mr. Major), the consequence
that he would be seeking would have procedural
requirements incorporated within it.
This is not to claim that every process can
be comfortably placed within the description
of states of affairs without changing
anything in social choice theory. Parts of the
literature that deal with comparisons of decision
mechanisms in arriving at given states
would need modification. If, in general, processes
leading to the emergence of a social
state were standardly included in the characterization
of that state, then we have to
construct "equivalence classes" to ignore
some differences (in this case, between some
antecedent processes) to be able to discuss
cogently the "same state" being brought
about by different decision mechanisms. To
make sense of such ideas as, say, "path
independence" (on which see Plott [1973]),
so that they are not rendered vacuous,
equivalence classes of this type would certainly
have to be constructed (on the concepts
of equivalence classes and invariance
conditions, see Sen [1986b]).
The contrast between the procedural and
consequential approaches is, thus, somewhat
overdrawn, and it may be possible to
combine them, to a considerable extent, in
an adequately rich characterization of states
of affairs. The dichotomy is far from pure,
and it is mainly a question of relative concentration.