direct evidence that such a norm exists and is
responsible for wage stickiness. His extensive
open-ended interviews sought to elicit why employers
failed to cut money wages in the Connecticut
recession of 1991-1992. Bewley
concludes that, even though substitute labor was
easily available, employers were reluctant to cut
wages because of the negative effects of such
cuts on morale. He says that managers were
afraid that cuts in money wages would cause
workers no longer to "identify" with their companies.
74 There might be no immediate consequences
during the recession. But employers
thought that such cuts would cause workers to
shirk after the recession had ended. They also
feared that their best workers would be more
likely to quit. These stories indicate that workers
are not thinking about their wages only in
real terms, relative to the price level or the
wages received by others. They also have a
special aversion to cuts in wages below their  current nominal levels.75
Norms about Wage Increases.-The motivation
underlying resistance to money wage cuts
is so obvious, and the facts are so unexceptionable,
that most macroeconomists accept the possibility
that money wages are sticky. Even so,
they rarely appreciate the broader implications
of such violation of the assumptions of natural
rate theory. Their adjusted model is that price
and wage decisions are made only with real con-  siderations in mind, but desired wage changes
will be truncated insofar as they entail money
wage decreases. To my mind, such a view entails
a theoretical error. As we have seen, the
existence of money wage rigidity occurs because
workers have a norm, which affects their
utility function, that their employers should not
make such cuts. The message of this finding is
that norms in the utility function yield at least
one clear violation of natural rate theory. That
suggests the further empirical possibility that
workers (and also employers and customers)
may also have other norms regarding what nominal
wages (and prices) should be. All such
violations are exceptions to natural rate theory,
and yield reasons for long-run trade-offs between
inflation and unemployment.
Money wage rigidity is then potentially only
the tip of an iceberg. If there is one way in
which nominal wages enter utility functions,
because of employees' norms regarding what
their employers should or should not do, there
could also be many other ways.
There is another natural way whereby such
norms could enter utility functions: employees
may not only have a norm that they should not
take wage cuts. They may also have norms
regarding the nominal rate of increase of their
wages or salaries. For example, employees may
believe that their employer should give them a
nominal raise.
There is little research on the existence of
such norms. The two questionnaire studies that
have investigated it obtain strong and mutually
reinforcing results. Eldar Shafir, Peter Diamond,
and Tversky (1997) asked respondents to
comment on a vignette about two young women
who take their first jobs with the same initial
income. Specifically they asked respondents
who will be better off: Barbara, who receives a
5-percent raise in the presence of 4-percent inflation;
or Ann, who receives a 2-percent raise
when inflation is zero; 79 percent of respondents
correctly said that Barbara would be
worse off than Ann economically. Nevertheless,
64 percent of respondents also said that Barbara
would be happier.76 Such responses are contrary
to the natural rate hypothesis that employees
only care about real returns. But an
easy explanation for this phenomenon occurs if  74 In more detail, Bewley (1999, 1-2) summarizes his  findings: "Other theories fail in part because they are based  on unrealistic psychological assumptions that people's abil-  ities do not depend on their state of mind and that they are  rational in the simplistic sense that they maximize a utility  that depends only on their consumption and working con-  ditions, not on the welfare of others. Wage rigidity is the  product of more complicated employee behavior, in the face  of which manager reluctance to cut pay is rational. Worker  behavior, however, is not always rational and completely  understandable. A model that captures the essence of wage  rigidity must take into account the capacity of employees to  identify with their firm and to internalize its objectives. This  internalization and workers' mood have a strong impact on
job performance and call for material, moral, and symbolic  reciprocation from company leadership."
75 Following the argument by Raj Chetty and Adam  Szeidl (2006), some employers may have been concerned  with the fact that their employees had fixed mortgages that  they would find difficult to pay with cuts in nominal wages.  This puts the violation of natural rate theory in another  place: why were these financial contracts in nominal rather  than in real terms?  76 Shafir, Diamond, and Tversky (1997, 351-52).