when the nonexistence of markets for future
goods under capitalism seemed to me
a much more obvious target.
However that may be, the nonexistence
of these markets must be faced. Now in
general equilibrium any part of the system
affects every other part in at least two
different ways. Thus, we may ask two
questions about the nonexistence of futures
goods markets: what are its implications
for the rest of the system and what are the
reasons for its nonexistence.
The implication first of all is that the
information needed by the optimizer is not
provided by an existing market. It will be
provided by a market which will exist in
the future, but that is a bit too late to help
in decisions made today. Hence, the optimizer
must replace the market commitment
to buy or sell at given terms by
expectations: expectations of prices and
expectations of quantities to be bought or
sold. But he cannot know the future.
Hence, unless he deludes himself, he must
know that both sets of expectations may
be wrong. In short, the absence of the
market implies that the optimizer faces a
world of uncertainty.
The exact modelling of behavior under
uncertainty is probably not crucial to the
subsequent discussion; let us use the
conventional expected-utility hypothesis.
When there is uncertainty, risk aversion
implies that steps will be taken to reduce
risks. This partly affects decisions within
the firm, such as the holding of inventories
and preference for flexible capital equipment,
and partly leads to new markets
which will shift risks to those most able
and willing to bear them, particularly
through the equity market. The rich development
of inventory theory and portfolio
theory in the last twenty years or so
reflects growing understanding of these
matters.
But when we speak of expected utilities,
we need to have some probabilities. Where
do these come from? We may in the first
instance regard them as subjective. But
the economic agent observes his world and
has the opportunity to learn from his experience,
for there is a considerable degree
of continuity. By Bayes' Theorem or perhaps
psychological learning theory, the
probabilities, say of future prices, will
gradually adjust so as to conform to the
facts. If indeed the econromic world exhibited
the same structure in some sense
from period to period, and if everybody
observed everything relevant, then the
probabilities ascribed by different individuals
to the same events might be expected
gradually to converge to the correct values
and therefore be the same for all. In fact,
of course, the basic economic facts are
changing, partly endogenously because of
capital accumulation in its most general
sense, partly exogenously with predictable
and unpredictable changes in technology
and tastes; equally if not more important,
though, is the fact that the dispersion of
information which is so economical implies
that different economic agents do not have
access to the same observations. Hence, it
is reasonable to infer that they will never
come into agreement as to probabilities of
future prices.
A further implication is that the past influences
the future. Jevons's well-known
slogan, "bygones are forever bygones,"
ceases to be fully accurate. The past is relevant
because it contains information
which changes the image of the future; the
probabilities which govern future actions
are modified by observations on the past.
It follows that present decisions with implications
for the future are functions of
past values of variables as well as present
values.
This point of view has been exploited in
the econometric models which have used
distributed lags in explaining investment
decisions. What still needs to be exploited
more, however, is that the inference to the