learn to adjust smoothly to fluctuations in
aggregate demand. I could even imagine
that workers might accept the necessary 4
percent reduction in nominal wages, in the
expectation that half of it would be offset by
lower prices. The trouble is that Pigou's
demand elasticities are way too high. A recent
econometric study by Kim Clark and
Richard Freeman, based on quarterly data
for U.S. manufacturing. 1950-76, puts the
real-wage elasticity of demand for labor at
about one-half, a whole order of magnitude
smaller than Pigou's guess.2 And the ClarkFreeman
work is presented as revisionist, a
counterweight to other estimates that are
typically lower, averaging out at about 0.15
according to a survey by Daniel Hamermesh.
To my mind, smooth wage adjustment
seems intrinsically unlikely in a world
with such a small demand elasticity and
institutions like those sketched earlier.
Nothing I read in the newspapers suggests
to me that 6 percent of nonfrictional unemployment
produces a threat adequate to set
off a quick 12-15 percent fall in the real
wage, or a drop in nominal wage rates twice
as large. Sellers facing inelastic demands
usually try to discourage price cutting; why
should workers be different?
The modern classical school seems curiously
remote from all this. When they try to
explain how the equilibrium volume of employment
can fluctuate as widely as actual
employment does in business cycles, their
only substitute for Pigou's high elasticity of
demand is a high elasticity of supply (of
labor) in the face of a perceived temporary
opportunity for unusual gains, which in this
case reflects wages that differ from average
expected (discounted) future wages. In other
words, People who give the vague impression
of being unemployed are actually engaged
in voluntary leisure. They are taking
it now, planning to substitute extra work
later, because they think, rightly or wrongly,
that current real wages are unusually low
compared with the present value of what the
labor market will offer in the future. They
may be responding to changes in real wages
or to changes in the real interest rate.
It is astonishing that believers have made
essentially no effort to verify this central
hypothesis. I know of no convincing evidence
in its favor,3 and I am not sure why it
has any claim to be taken seriously. It is
hardly plausible on its face. Even if the
workers in question have misread the future,
they are merely mistaken, not confused or
mystified about their own motives. It is thus
legitimate to wonder why the unemployed
do not feel themselves to be engaged in
voluntary intertemporal substitution, and
why they queue up in such numbers when
legitimate jobs of their usual kind are
offered during a recession.4
When they face the market-clearing issue
at all, Pigou's successors take a rather abstract
line. They regard it as inherently incredible
that unexploited opportunities for
beneficial trade should be anything but
ephemeral-which means merely that they
ignore all those human and institutional
facts of which Pigou was aware. Or else they
argue that one cannot believe in the failure
of markets to clear without having an
acceptable theory to explain why that
happens. That is a remarkable precept when
you think about it. I remember reading once
that it is still not understood how the giraffe
manages to pump an adequate blood supply
all the way up to its head; but it is hard to
imagine that anyone would therefore conclude
that giraffes do not have long necks.
At least not anyone who had ever been to a
zoo. Besides, I think perfectly acceptable
2The Clark-Freeman estimates are based on quarterly
data for aggregate U.S. manufacturing. Their
difference from other work appears to rest on allowing
wage changes to operate with a lag different from other
factor prices. According to their results the lag of
employment behind wage changes is quite short; it is
complete in about two quarters.  3Just after writing those words, I received a working
paper by Robert Hall which (a) concludes that the
elasticity of supply of labor required to make the intertemporal-
substitution hypothesis work is actually in the
ballpark suggested by other facts, but (b) rejects the
whole theory on other empirical grounds. I have done
some further experimentation on Halls data (with the
help of Mr. Sunil Sanghvi) with results that cast doubt  on the reliability of even the first conclusion. On reflection,
I stand by the words in the text.
4I have tried to phrase that carefully. For some
direct evidence, see "Jobs and Want Ads: A Look
Behind the Evidence," Fortune, Nov. 20, 1978.