and Robert Noyce of Fairchild Semiconductor in
1959. An integrated circuit consists of many, even
millions, of transistors that store and manipulate
data in binary form. Integrated circuits were originally
developed for data storage and retrieval and
semiconductor storage devices became known as
memory chips.5
The first patent for the integrated circuit was
granted to Noyce. This resulted in a decade of
litigation over the intellectual property rights.
The litigation and its outcome demonstrate the
critical importance of intellectual property in
the development of information technology.
Kilby was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
in 2000 for discovery of the integrated circuit;
regrettably, Noyce died in 1990.6
A. Moore's Law
In 1965 Gordon E. Moore, then Research
Director at Fairchild Semiconductor, made a
prescient observation, later known as Moore's
Law.7 Plotting data on memory chips, he observed
that each new chip contained roughly
twice as many transistors as the previous chip
and was released within 18-24 months of its
predecessor. This implied exponential growth
of chip capacity at 35-45 percent per year!
Moore's prediction, made in the infancy of the
semiconductor industry, has tracked chip capacity
for 35 years. He recently extrapolated this
trend for at least another decade.8
In 1968 Moore and Noyce founded Intel Corporation
to speed the commercialization of
memory chips.9 Integrated circuits gave rise to
microprocessors with functions that can be programmed
by software, known as logic chips.
Intel's first general purpose microprocessor was
developed for a calculator produced by Busicom,
a Japanese firm. Intel retained the intellectual
property rights and released the device
commercially in 1971.
The rapidly rising trends in the capacity of
microprocessors and storage devices illustrate the
exponential growth predicted by Moore's Law.
The first logic chip in 1971 had 2,300 transistors,
while the Pentium 4 released on November 20,
2000, had 42 million! Over this 29-year period the
number of transistors increased by 34 percent per
year. The rate of productivity growth for the U.S.
economy during this period was slower by two
orders of magnitude.
B. Semiconductor Prices
Moore's Law captures the fact that successive
generations of semiconductors are faster and better.
The economics of semiconductors begins with
the closely related observation that semiconductors
have become cheaper at a truly staggering
rate! Figure 1 gives semiconductor price indexes
constructed by Bruce T. Grimm (1998) of the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and employed
in the U.S. National Income and Product
Accounts since 1996. These are divided between
memory chips and logic chips. The underlying
detail includes seven types of memory chips and
two types of logic chips.
Between 1974 and 1996 prices of memory
chips decreased by a factor of 27,270 times or at
40.9 percent per year, while the implicit deflator
for the gross domestic product (GDP) increased
by almost 2.7 times or 4.6 percent per year! Prices
of logic chips, available for the shorter period
1985 to 1996, decreased by a factor of 1,938 or
54.1 percent per year, while the GDP deflator
increased by 1.3 times or 2.6 percent per year!
Semiconductor price declines closely parallel
Moore's Law on the growth of chip capacity,
setting semiconductors apart from other products.
Figure 1 also reveals a sharp acceleration in
the decline of semiconductor prices in 1994 and
1995. The microprocessor price decline leapt to
more than 90 percent per year as the semiconductor
industry shifted from a three-year product
cycle to a greatly accelerated two-year
cycle. This is reflected in the 2000 Update of
the International Technology Road Map for
Semiconductors,'0 prepared by a consortium of
industry associations.