inequality. Again this view of
matters fits our present concerns. Minimum
wage legislation, price support
legislation, and support to collective bargaining
are all questions of continuing
political controversy as they apply to
small business and agriculture. They are
not serious issues in highly organized industry
in the planning system. And the
question of a floor under family income, a
matter of intense political argumeint, has
recently divided workers in the planning
system who would not be beneficiaries
from those in the market system who
would be. Again there is reassurance in a
view of the economy that prepares us for
the politics of our time.
The inclusion of power in economic calculus
also prepares us for the great debate
over the environment. It is the claim of
neoclassical economics that it foresaw
possible environmental consequences from
economic development-that it, some
time ago, embraced the concept of external
diseconomies of production and, by inference,
of consumption. Alas, this is a modest
claim. The noninclusion of external diseconomies
was long viewed as a minor
defect of the price system-an afterthought
for an hour's classroom discussion.
And, as E. J. Mishan has observed,
it was largely ignored in the textbooks.
Nor does the notion of external diseconomies
now offer a useful remedy. No one
can suppose, or really supposes, that more
than a fraction of the damage especially
that to the beauty and tranquility of our
surroundings -could be compensated in
any useful way by internalizing external
diseconomies.

If growth is the central and rewarding
purpose of the firm and if power is comprehensively
available to impose this goal
on the society, the possibility of conflict
between private growth and public purpose
as regards the environment is immediately
plausible. So, since this power
depends extensively not on force but
persuasion, is the effort to make pollution
seem palatable or worth the cost, including
the effort to nmake advertising of remedial
action a substitute for action. And so is the
remedy to which all industrial countries
are being forced. This is not, primarily, to
internalize external diseconomies. Rather
it is to specify the legal parameters within
which growth may proceed or, as in the
case of automobile use in central cities,
airplane use over urban areas, the SST,
industrial, commercial, and residential
appropriation of countryside andI roadside,
the kinds of growth that are inconsistent
with public purpose. We would have saved
much corruption of our surroundings if
our economics had held such action to be
the predictable consequence of the pursuit
of present economic goals and not the
exceptional result of a peculiar aberration
of the price system.

We had best, in any case, have the right
guide to action for the future for there is a
strong conservative case for such guidance.
While economists toy weakly with external
diseconomies, others are arguing
that growth itself is the villain. They are
seeking its extinction. To see environmental
damage as a natural consequence
of planning power and purpose and to see,
in consequence, the need for confining
growth within parameters that protect the
public interest could be important for ensuring
continued economic growth.
Finally, when power becomes part of our
system, so does Ralph Nader. We are
prepared for the explosion of concern now
called consumerism. If the consumer is the
ultimate source of authority, his abuse is
an occasional fault. He cannot be fundamentally
at odds with an economic system
that he commands. But if the producing
firm has comprehensive power and purposes
of its own, there is every likelihood
of conflict. Technology is then subordinate
to the strategy of consumer persuasion.