least three distinct social states and at least
two (but not infinitely many) individuals,
Arrow also wanted a social welfare function
to yield a social ordering for every possible
combination of individual preferences; that
is, it must have a universal domain. A second
condition is called the independence of
irrelevant alternatives. This can be defined in
different ways, and I shall choose an extremely
simple form. The way a society ranks
a pair of alternative social states x and y
should depend on the individual preferences
only over that pair-in particular,
not on how the other ("irrelevant") alternatives
are ranked.
Now consider the idea of some people
being "decisive": a set G of people-I shall
call them a group G-having their way no
matter what others prefer. In ranking a pair
x and y, if it turns out that x gets socially
ranked above y whenever everyone in group
G prefers x to y (no matter what preferences
those not in G have), then G is decisive
over that ordered pair (x, y). When a
group G is decisive over all ordered pairs, it
is simply "decisive."
Arrow required that no individual (formally,
no single-member group) should be
decisive (nondictatorship), but-following
the Paretian tradition-also demanded that
the group of all individuals taken together
should be decisive (the Pareto principle).
The "impossibility theorem," in this version
(presented in Arrow [1963]), shows that it is
impossible to have a social welfare function
with universal domain, satisfying independence,
the Pareto principle, and nondictatorship.

The theorem can be proved in three simple
steps.8 The first two steps are the following
(with the second lemma drawing on
the first).
FIELD-EXPANSION LEMMA: If a group
is decisive over any pair of states, it is decisive.
9
GROUP-CONTRACTION LEMMA: If a
group (of more than one person) is decisive,
then so is some smaller group contained in
it.
The final step uses the Group-Contraction
Lemma to prove the theorem. By the Pareto
principle, the group of all individuals is decisive.
Since it is finite, by successive partitioning
(and each time picking the decisive
part), we arrive at a decisive individual, who
must, thus, be a dictator. Hence the impossibility.

8The strategy of proof employed here (as in Sen
[1986b]) is more direct and simpler than the versions
used in Arrow (1963) and Sen (1970) and does not
require defining additional concepts (such as "almost
decisiveness").
9For proof, take two pairs of alternative states (x, y)
and (a, b), all distinct (the proof when they are not all
distinct is quite similar). Group G is decisive over
(x, y); we have to show that it is decisive over (a, b) as
well. By unrestricted domain, let everyone in G prefer
a to x to y to b, while all others prefer a to x, and y
to b, but rank the other pairs in any way whatever. By
the decisiveness of G over (x, y), x is socially preferred
to y. By the Pareto principle, a is socially preferred to
x, and y to b. Therefore, by transitivity, a is socially
preferred to b. If this result is influenced by individual
preferences over any pair other than (a, b), then the
condition of independence would be violated. Thus, a
must be ranked above b simply by virtue of everyone in
G preferring a to b (since others can have any preference
whatever over this pair). So G is indeed decisive
over (a, b).
10For proof, take a decisive group G and partition it
into G1 and G2. Let everyone in G1 prefer x to y and
x to z, with any possible ranking of (y, z), and let
everyone in group G2 prefer x to y and z to y, with
any possible ranking of (x, z). It does not matter what
those not in G prefer. If, now, x is socially preferred to
z then the members of group G1 would be decisive
over this pair, since they alone definitely prefer x to z
(the others can rank this pair in any way). If G1 is not
to be decisive, we must have z at least as good as x for
some individual preferences over (x, z) of nonmembers
of G1. Take that case, and combine this social ranking
(that z is at least as good as x) with the social
preference for x over y (a consequence of the decisiveness
of G and the fact that everyone in G prefers x to
y). By transitivity, z is socially preferred to y. But only
G2 members definitely prefer z to y. Thus G2 is
decisive over this pair (z,y). Thus, from the FieldExpansion
Lemma, G2 is decisive. So either G1 or G2
must be decisive-proving the lemma.