useful insights and guidance for policy
purposes. But as economists, we would be
the first to underscore that these puzzles
are far from being fitted into an articulated
and holistic theory of inflation. Inflationary
analysis appears as an appendage to
Keynesian and monetarist theories. But
as yet, the Keynesian apparatus cannot
tell us how any given change in aggregate
demand is divided between changes in
real output and changes in prices. Nor has
monetarist theory unlocked the puzzle of
how the effects of monetary changes are
divided between output and price level
changes. And no big breakthrough is in
sight.

Does this mean that the economist has
to stand mute in the meanwhile? Not at
all. He is pushing ahead on the various
pieces of basic research on the cancer of
inflation and isolating and prescribing
effectively for particular forms of the
cancer even without having a complete
explanation of the disease. Let me come
back to the sustained and systematic research
efforts on endemic inflation after
examining the 1973-74 epidemic and the
economist's responses to it. Since the
epidemic is an over-layer on the endemic
base, the distinctions won't be clear-cutbut
they are nonetheless useful for viewing
what the economist is able to contribute
to policy.

The food-fuel price bulge generated over
half of the 1973-74 inflation-and of
economists' woes as well. Yet, it is asking
a lot of economists to expect them to have
foreseen that the oil cartel would quadruple
oil prices, that the world would suffer
widespread and successive crop failures,
that the Peruvian anchovies would go into
hiding, and that the Soviets would "solve
our surplus grain problem" overnight.
Several unpleasant policy surprises also
beset the inflation forecasters. First, just
when a new rash of inflation was breaking
out early in 1973, the reasonably effective
Phase II controls were abruptly dropped
in favor of the weak and ineffective Phase
III. Second, six months later, after inflation
had changed into a commodity-driven
structural phenomenon involving a drastic
readjustment of relative prices, the White
House (to the pained surprise of economists
inside and outside the administration)
prescribed just the wrong medicine,
a new wage-price freeze. A third policy
surprise was that the dollar was allowed
to sink like a stone: At its low point in the
summer of 1973 (just before a substantial
rebound), relative prices of imports had
risen 10 percent in six months. About a
quarter of the 1973 inflation has been attributed
to these policy developments
(see William Nordhaus and John Shoven).
It is worth noting that unexpected
twists and turns of federal policy which
might be termed "internal shocks" in
contrast with the "external shocks" of the
food-fuel price explosion-are a continuing
bane of the forecaster's existence. The
about-face of the Federal Reserve in 1974
is another painful case in point. The sharp
turn from ease to tightness in the first
quarter of the year was a major factor in
transforming prospects of recovery into
recession in the second half of 1974. It is
not quite clear why economists should be
better at anticipating these shocks, especially
the external ones, than society as
a whole, or other professional specialists,
or practical men of the world. Nothing in
statistical methodology or economic science
enables us to predict random shocks.
What can be expected of us is that when
they occur, we will spot them quickly,
identify them, and analyze their significance
for policy.

It is also worth remembering that
democratic governments, by their nature,
are pressure-responders rather than problem-
anticipators. This carries two implications
for political economists. On one
hand, if an idea's time has not yet come,