B. Reciprocity and Altruism
Reciprocity is a simple form of social interaction,
present in economic trade and explained
by self-interest. Reciprocity is easy to
establish when it is synchronous, as in bilateral
barter. Asynchronous reciprocity, however,
requires reputation and trust. Norms for
fair practice, and sanctions for bad behavior,
may evolve in social networks to facilitate
asynchronous reciprocity, and individuals
may by habit or internalization conform to
these norms even in novel situations where
the normal cycle of approval and reputation is
suspended (see Fehr and Klaus M. Schmidt,
1999; Laetitia B. Mulder et al., 2005). Consider
the single-shot ultimatum game with
anonymous players. Player 1 proposes a division
of a prize of 100 units. If Player 2
accepts, the players get the proposed shares;
otherwise, they get nothing. It is rational for
Player 2 to accept any positive amount, and
thus rational for Player 1 to offer the minimum
positive amount. If, however, the probability
of acceptance a(s) by Player 2 is less
than one when the share s offered by Player 1
is low, then Player l's optimal strategy is to
maximize a(s) vg (1 - s). Students in a cross
section of developed countries play similarly.
Offers are usually 42 to 50 percent of the
prize, and offers less than 20 percent are
rejected about half the time. These results are
consistent with social norms for fairness in
which individuals altruistically incur costs to
punish greedy behavior.
Sam Bowles and a team of experimental
economists and ethnographers have conducted
anonymous ultimatum game experiments in 15
isolated societies whose ways of life provide
natural experiments on the influence of cultural
norms (see Joseph Henrich et al., 2001, 2004).
The findings overall are that cultures where
cooperative activity is important, and particularly
where people are exposed to markets, induce
offers in the ultimatum game that are more
equitable.
Genetic altruism is the phenomenon of
self-sacrifice for the good of your family or
kinship group. Genetic altruism appears to
explain cooperation in most species, and
seems to have a convincing evolutionary basis.
It has been a central theme of sociobiologists
in the past four decades, but the
concept itself is as old as the concept of
self-interest, as in a quote from Adam Smith
(1759):
Every man feels [after himself, the pleasures
and pains] of the members of his
own family. Those who usually live in the
same house with him, his parents, his
children, his brothers and sisters, are naturally
the objects of his warmest affections.
They are naturally and usually the
persons upon whose happiness or misery
his conduct must have the greatest
influence.
Despite its recognized importance, particularly
in economic models of the family and
of intergenerational transfers, genetic altruism
has not been systematically studied as a
determinant of economic behavior. The operation
of genetic selection could be very indirect.
Thus, the acquisition of language, the
exploitation of comparative advantage, the
formation of successful defenses against marauders
and disease, and a disposition to "fair
play" that reduces interpersonal conflict may
all arise from the selective advantage of group
traits that promote sociality. Then altruistic
behavior, including pure altruism with gifts
to unrelated individuals with no possibility
of personal gain, might be explained as an
indirect consequence of genetic self-interest,
as might the "warm glow" most humans experience
when placed in a supportive, cooperative
environment, the distaste people have
for aggressive, greedy traders, the potlatch
pride of being more generous than your
neighbors.
Summarizing, physiological, behavioral, and
sociological evidence indicate strongly that
consumers will often fail to promote their
self-interest reliably when choices involve risk,
ambiguity, integration of experience, and perceptions
of remote and/or unlikely events. Consumers'
failures will loom large, and this may
generate agoraphobia. Market-oriented economic
policy needs to take into account how
consumers' market experiences and outcomes
will influence well-being and acceptance of
market solutions.