founder of the Chicago school, Frank Knight,
who said that the extreme economic man,
maximizing every material interest, and the
extreme Christian, loving his neighbor as
himself, were alike in that neither had any
friends.'
To admit social goods, not traded in
markets, into our economic calculus does not
call for altruism. Economists are reluctant to
depend on self-denial to any degree (Kenneth
Arrow, 1975, p. 22), and moral philosophers
are not far behind. To a modern
student of ethics, James Fishkin (1982, ch.
ii), obligations to others fall into three categories:
minimal altruism, where the benefit
to the receiver is substantial and the cost
to the altruist low-the acts of a cheap
Samaritan; acts of heroic sacrifice that are
not called for; and a robust zone of indifference
where one has no cause to be concerned
over the effects of one's acts on others.
This is for positive actions. Acts that harm
others are proscribed by the Golden Rule.
Adam Smith expressed the same viewpoint
forcefully: " Every man is, no doubt, by nature
first and principally recommended to his
own care" (1759 (1808), I, p. 193), but goes
on: "Although the ruin of our neighbour
may affect us less than a very small misfortune
of our own, we must not ruin him to
prevent that small misfortune, or even to
prevent our own ruin" (ibid., p. 194). Does
this prohibit us from playing zero-sum games
or negative non-zero-sum games? In international
trade, must we refrain from levying
the optimum tariff? The optimum tariff works
to self-interest mainly in the absence of retaliation,
and if Adam Smith excludes hurting
our neighbor, he recognizes that "as every
man doth, so shall it be done to him, and
retaliation seems to be the great law of nature"
(ibid., p. 191).
Note parenthetically that today's moral
philosophers cover a wide territory either
side of Fishkin, from Peter Singer (1972) at
one extreme whose criterion of justice requires
successive acts of altruism until the
welfare of the recipient has risen to that of
the giver which has fallen, to Robert Nozick
(1974) at the other who believes that self-interest
rules out altruism almost altogether.
III
Self-interest then is legitimate over a large
zone of indifference provided that justice
is served by our not hurting others. But
the robust zone of indifference applies to
strangers, and not to those with whom we
have a special relationship, sharing collective
goods. It does not apply in the family, the
neighborhood, in clubs, in the tribe, racial or
religious group, or in the nation. There is
some uncertainty whether it applies in regions
within a country-New England, the
West, the South-or to arrangements between
countries short of the world level such
as North America or the European Common
Market. Collective goods involved here are
distributed by mechanisms different from the
market: gifts, grants, unequal exchange,
sharing through a budget according to
need, interest-free loans, inheritance, dowries,
alimony, and the like all have a place.
Membership in these groups is decided in
various ways: by birth, by choice-as in
moving into a certain neighborhood or
migrating between countries, by application
for admission and acceptance. Walzer defends
the right of countries to keep out
would-be immigrants motivated by economic
self-interest, but not those subjected to
persecution: "The primary good that we
distribute to one another is membership in
some community" (1981; 1983, ch. ii, p. 1).
He argues, however, that states lack the right
to keep members from emigrating if there is
some other community ready to take them
in. Clubs discriminate against outsiders.
Neighborhoods are more complex, being presumably
open to anyone able to afford and
find a place to live, but, in sociological reality,
often exhibiting tendencies to attract their
own kind and repel others, including harassment
or unwritten or even legal restrictions
against property ownership. The groupings
are amorphous, but they exist.
The nature of the positive bonds that link
families, neighborhoods, tribes, regions, and