from rising to be replaced by cooler air. The
phenomenon should have been called the
"smudgepot effect," but it is too late to do
anything about it.
A first step in pursuing this phenomenon
is to assess how much warming might go
with an enhanced concentration of these
gases. That cannot be done in the laboratory;
there are too many feedbacks. A
warmer atmosphere will contain more water
vapor; water vapor itself is a greenhouse
gas. Changes in temperature and humidity
will change cloud cover; clouds can reflect
or absorb incoming or outgoing light according
to their composition and altitude. The
average temperature is only one dimension;
temperatures at different altitudes and different
latitudes matter. But a starting point
has been the change in average surface atmospheric
temperature expected to accompany
a specified increase in the concentration
of greenhouse gasses; and arbitrarily,
but reasonably, the base case is taken as a
doubling of the concentration.
A moment on why a doubling is the
benchmark. To compare estimates of warming,
people must use the same hypothesized
concentration of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. (Alternatively, they could use
the same hypothesized temperature increase
and estimate the corresponding concentration.
) Doubling, like a half-life in reverse,
is a natural unit if it is within the
range of practical interest, and it is. A doubling
is expected sometime in the next century,
so it is temporally relevant; and a
doubling is estimated to make a substantial
but not cataclysmic difference. If fixation on
a doubling seems to imply an upper limit on
any expected increase, the implication is
unfortunate: enough fossil fuel exists to support
several doublings.
In 1979, a committee of the National
Academy of Sciences (NAS) (1979 p. 2)
estimated the change in average temperature
to accompany a doubling of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere: three degrees
Celsius, with a range of 1.5 degrees to either
side. (In the last 15 years other greenhouse
gases have received attention; these
other gases can be converted to their carbon
dioxide equivalents and the original
estimate applied to the mixture.) The NAS
appointed another committee a few years
later to reexamine that estimate, and the
new committee saw no reason to change it
(NAS, 1982 p. 51). An intergovernmental
panel on climate change (IPCC), consisting
of scientists from many nations, revisited
the estimate in 1990 and concluded, from
the several climate models they had examined,
that "the models results do not justify
altering the previously accepted range of 1.5
to 4.5 degrees C" (IPCC, 1990 p. xxv). Thus,
the estimate appears to be robust over time,
but the spread of uncertainty remains large:
the upper limit is three times the lower
limit. (No quantitative interpretation of
these upper and lower "limits" has been
made public. Both National Academy reports
referred to them as "probable error.")
II
The uncertainties are even greater in
translating a temperature change into climates.
The media support a popular view
that things will just get hotter; a news magazine
cover was a sweating global face. But
the laboratories that do the meteorology do
not simply predict warming; they do not
even predict that the most noticeable effects
will necessarily be temperature changes.
Among the great driving forces of weather
and climate is the temperature differential
between equatorial and polar regions; convection
currents coupled with the rotation
of the earth are engines of atmospheric
circulation and, ultimately, ocean circulation.
The models predict greater temperature
change in the polar regions than near
the equator. This change in gradient can
drive changes in circulation. The results may
be warmer in some places and colder in
others, wetter in some places and drier in
others, cloudier in some places and sunnier
in others, stormier in some places and less
stormy in others-generally a complex of
changes that would bear no easy relation to
an average change in global temperature.
The change in average temperature is
useful as an index of climate change. It is