Economics today rides the crest of
intellectual respectability and popular
acclaim. The serious attention with which
our pronouncements are received by the
general public, hard-bitten politicians, and
even skeptical businessmen is second only
to that which was given to physicists and
space experts a few years ago when the
round trip to the moon seemed to be our
only truly national goal. The flow of
learned articles, monographs, and textbooks
is swelling like a tidal wave; Econometrica,
the leading journal in the field
of mathematical economics, has just
stepped up its publication schedule from
four to six issues per annum.
And yet an uneasy feeling about the
present state of our discipline has been
growing in some of us who have watched
its unprecedented development over the
last three decades. This concern seems to
be shared even by those who are themselves
contributing successfully to the
present boom. They play the game with
professional skill but have serious doubts
about its rules.
Much of current academic teaching and
research has been criticized for its lack of
relevance, that is, of immediate practical
impact. In a nearly instant response to
this criticism, research projects, seminars
aind undergraduate courses have been
set up on poverty, on city and small town
slums, on pure water and fresh air. In an
almost Pavlovian reflex, whenever a new
complaint is raised, President Nixon appoints
a commission and the university
announces a new course. Far be it from
me to argue that the fire should not be
shifted when the target moves. The trouble
is caused, however, not by an inadequate
selection of targets, but rather by our
inability to hit squarely any one of them.
The uneasiness of which I spoke before is
caused not by the irrelevance of the practical
problems to which present day economists
address their efforts, but rather by
the palpable inadequacy of the scientific
means with which they try to solve them.
If this simply were a sign of the overly
high aspiration level of a fast developing
discipline, such a discrepancy between ends
and means should cause no worry. But I
submit that the consistently indifferent
performance in practical applications is in
fact a symptom of a fundamental imbalance
in the present state of our discipline.
The weak and all too slowly growing empirical
foundation clearly cannot support
the proliferating superstructure of pure, or
should I say, speculative economic theory.
Much is being made of the widespread,
nearly mandatory use by modern economic
theorists of mathematics. To the
extent to which the economic phenomena
possess observable quantitative dimensions,
this is indisputably a major forward
step. Unfortunately, any one capable of
learning elementary, or preferably advanced
calculus and algebra, and acquiring
acquaintance with the specialized terminology
of economics can set himself up as a
theorist. Uncritical enthusiasm for mathematical
formulation tends often to con-