requires that new disequilibria are always
arising. Aggregate demand may be stable,
but beneath its stability is never-ending
flux: new products, new processes, new
tastes and fashions, new developments of
land and niatural resources, obsolescent
industries and (leclining areas.
The overlap of vacancies and unemployment-
-say, the sum of the two for
any given difference between them--is a
measure of the heterogeneity or dispersion
of individual markets. The amount of
(lispersion (lepen(1s directly on the size of
those shocks of demand anid technology
that keep markets in perpetual disequilibriumn,
and inversely on the responsive mobility
of labor. The one increases, the other
diminishes the frictional component of
unemployment, that is, the number of unfilled
vacancies coexisting with any given
unemployment rate.

A central assumptioin of the theory is
that the functions relating wage change
to excess demand or supply are non-linear,
specifically that unemployment retards
money wages less than vacancies accelerate
them. Noinlinearity in the response of
wages to excess demand has several important
implications. First, it helps to
explain the characteristic observed curvature
of the Phillips curve. Each successive
increment of unemployment has less effect
in reducing the rate of inflation. Linear
wage response, on the other hand, would
mean a linear Phillips relation.
Second, given the overall state of aggregate
demand, economy-wide vacancies less
unemployment, wage inflation will be
greater the larger the variance among
markets in excess (lemand and supply.
As a number of recent empirical studies,
have confirmed (see George Perry and
Charles Schultze), dispersion is inflationary.
Of course, the rate of wage
inflation will depend not only on the
overall (lispersion of excess demands and
supplies across markets but also on the
particular markets where the excess supplies
and demands happen to fall. An unlucky
random (Irawing might put the
excess demands in highly responsive markets
and the excess supplies in especially
unresponsive ones.

Third, the nonlinearity is an explanation
of inflationary bias, in the following
sense. Even when aggregate vacancies are
at most equal to unemployment, the average
disequilibrium component will be
positive. Full employment in the sense of
equality of vacancies and unemployment
is not compatible with price stability.
Zero inflation requires unemployment in
excess of vacancies.

Criteria that coincide in full long-run
equilibrium zero inflation and zero aggregate
excess demand diverge in stochastic
macro-equilibrium. Full long-run
equilibrium in all markets would show no
unemployment, no vacancies, no unanticipated
inflation. But with unending sectoral
flux, zero excess (lemand spells inflation
and zero inflation spells net excess
supply, unemployment in excess of vacancies.
In these circumstances neither
criterion can be justified simply because it
is a property of full long-run equilibrium.
Both criteria automatically allow for frictional
unemployment incident to the required
movements of workers between
markets; the no-inflation criterion requires
enough additional unemployment to wipe
out inflationary bias.

' I turn now to the equilibrium component,
the rate of wage increase in a market
with neither excess demand nor excess
supply. It is reasonable to suppose that the
equilibrium component depends on the
trend of wages of comparable labor elsewhere.
A "competitive wage," one that
reflects relevant trends fully, is what employers
will offer if they wish to maintain
their share of the volume of employment.
TI his will happen where the rate of growth
of marginal revenue product the compound