recent attempt at getting more money for
economic statistics, the late "Boskin initiative"
? Central economic statistics do not
have a clear constituency that lobbies on
their behalf. Recent governments seem not
to care enough, or to have enough energy to
fight for something that has a more distant
horizon than the next election. One hopes
for some improvement in this situation from
the current administration. It has people
who know better in reasonably important
positions. Still, with the main focus on the
daily crisis and the continuing budget battles
with Congress, I am not all that optimistic.
But if we want progress in this area,
if we care, we need to make our opinions
heard. We need to convince Congress (and
ourselves) that the requests for additional
funding of the statistical infrastructure are
justified as investments in general knowledge
and more informed policy formation;
that they are not just self-serving, intended
to allow us to publish more articles or run
thousands more regressions; that it is indeed
important to know what is happening
and to understand where we might be going
or drifting.18

We need also to make observation, data
collection, and data analysis a more central
component of our graduate teaching. How
can we expect our community to fight for
the budgets of the BEA, BLS, or Census, if
the average student doesn't really know how
the data that they use are manufactured or
what the national accounts are made of.19
We also need to teach them to go out and
collect their own data on interesting aspects
of the economy and to rely less on "given"
data from distant agencies.'o There are encouraging
signs that some of this is happening,
especially in the micro area. One is
much more cheered by work such as that of
Robert Fogel (1986) on heights and nutrition,
Alan Krueger and Orley Ashenfelter
(1992) on twins, Richard Levin et al. (1987)
on the appropriability of technology,
Rebecca Henderson and Cockburn on pharmaceutical
R&D, Richard Freeman and

Harry Holtzer (1986) on inner-city youths,
Schankerman and Pakes (1986) on patent
renewal data, Manuel Trajtenberg (1990a)
on CT scanners, and Trajtenberg (199Gb)
and Adam Jaffe et al. (1993) on patent
citations, where researchers go out, collect,
and create new data sets, than by the
20,000th regression on the Robert Summers
and Alan Heston (1991) data set, illuminating
as it may be. But unless we transmit this
message to our students, we will not be able
to convince others that this is a cause worth
supporting.

VI. Expanding the Framework
Is there something possibly wrong with
the way we ask the productivity question,
with the analytical framework into which we
force the available data? I think so. I would
focus on the treatment of disequilibria and
the measurement of knowledge and other
externalities. The current measurement
framework proceeds as if all investment
and employment decisions are made at
known and common factor and product
prices, throwing all of the heterogeneity
and uncertainty-the surprises and the disappointments-
into the residual category.
An alternative view would see measured
productivity growth as a summation of
above- (and below-) average returns to various
current investment decisions and capital
gains (or losses) on existing physical- and