The role of policy in this vision of the
growth process is an "enabling" one. By creating
the circumstances where firms can
quickly and accurately predict opportunities
for real cost reduction and act on them, governments
can guide the economy toward an
enhanced contribution of RCR to growth. By
rationalizing and/or eliminating barriers and
controls, they may also lead to an increased
pace of investment and increased rates of return.
In this view, the connection between
good policy and growth is not mechanical, and
thus cannot easily be captured in regressiontype
analysis, but that does not stop it from
being of vital importance.
I want to give special weight to another role
of "growth-enabling" policy actions, which
has to do with how policies, the effects of
which might typically be considered to be
comparative static, can nonetheless turn out to
influence economic growth rates over extended
periods of time.
This story begins with a recognition that
most developing countries have typically used
production techniques that were "backward"
in relation to those used by the advanced economies.
One way to verify this is to imagine
integrally replicating, say, a U.S. factory in India,
and manning it there with Indian workers
equivalent in skill to their U.S. counterparts.
The combination of lower construction costs
and much lower operating costs (mainly
wages) would permit this hypothetical new Indian
firm to undercut the prices of both the
U.S. firm of which it was a copy and the typical
Indian firm currently active in the same
industry. This says that the typical Indian firm
is operating on an "inferior" production function.
If, as I believe, the difference in efficiency
between U.S. and developing-country
firms is typically large, there is much room for
quite rapid improvements in the developing
countries as they learn how to "adopt and
adapt" already-known techniques from the
advanced countries.
I would assume that the incentives for "convergence"
are always present, but that they
have typically run into barriers and trammels
of many kinds in the poor countries of the
world. Reducing the barrfers and loosening the
trammels permits the more rapid convergence
to techniques that are closer to the frontier of
knowledge.
The way I see the influence of policy in
growth, it is simply not true that implementing
enabling policies typically permits a quantum
jump from the old to the truly modem. It is
more accurate to describe it as speeding up
what will in any case be a very lengthy process.
Personally, I like the analogy to a hydraulic
system in which a large vessel with a
high water level and lots of water is connected
to a much smaller and narrower vessel with a
much lower level of water. Physical laws dictate
a tendency for the water levels to equalize
in the end. But this can take a very long time
if the tube connecting the two vessels is tiny,
or is clogged by extraneous matter.
The policies that we consider good for
growth have the attribute, in this analogy, of
removing the extraneous matter and/or enlarging
the connecting tube. But even with the best
modernizing policies, the tube remains small
enough so that it takes many decades for a
country to pass from poor to middle income or
from middle income to rich. If somehow the
hydraulic connection could be made so large
as to bring about an almost instantaneous full
adjustment of the water level, then we would
say that good policies mainly represent level
adjustments. But observing even the best of
real-world growth experiences, I think we
have to conclude that the adjustment is going
to be extended over a lengthy period in any
event, thus causing the big observable result
of better policies to be a higher growth rate
over an extended period rather than a discrete
jump to a totally different level.
This way of looking at the world also leads
to some observations on the current literature
dealing with convergence. I have long been
mystified by allusions to an ultimate convergence
of growth rates among countries, or an
ultimate convergence of levels of output per
head. To me, the natural convergence is product
by product, not country by country. And
ing the rate of return (p) imputed to new investments.
Arguments can be developed for using arbitrary but "sensible"
rates (like 10, 15, or 20 percent), or for applying
to investments by individual firms and/or industries rates
of return T that are obtained not from those specific firms
or industries but from broad sectoral (e.g., manufacturing)
or economywide averages. I am pursuing these avenues in
work that will be reported at a later time.