percent trend rate of private-sector productivity
growth as it is to discard a vision of a
trend rate which continues to be significantly
positive. It should, therefore, be no
surprise that official and other responsible
projections foresee productivity growth rates
that lie above zero, but significantly below
the average postwar rate.20
The uncertainty surrounding any such
forecasts can hardly be overstated. The
progress of science and the enlargement of
the knowledge bases of technology go on
apace. Our problem is to overcome or mitigate
the forces that are checking our ability
to give our growing knowledge practical application
and to exploit its benefits fully.
There are both physical and monetary sides
to our present condition which make our
prospects particularly perplexing. On the
physical side is the new energy question.
Quite apart from the policies we pursuewhich
may themselves be of crucial importance-
we do not now know on what terms
supplies will be available, even so far as they
depend only on physical and technological
considerations. We are uncertain about the
elasticity of substitution between energy and
other resources, and we do not know how
much technological progress will itself be
impeded as we try to move along a lessenergy-
intensive path than we have followed
in the past. The spread of industrialization
from Europe and North America to Asia
and Latin America also raises questions
about the supplies of other primary materials.
As for money, so long as we prove
incapable of overcoming our present disposition
to inflation, we shall not be able to
reach and exploit what would otherwise be
the growth potentials of our economy. But if
we ever do regain a substantial degree of
price stability, we may be happily surprised,
even as the Stagnationists of the 1930's were
astonished by our growth performance in
the postwar period.
VII
In spite of these uncertainties and whatever
pleasant or gloomy surprises they may
hold, we can hardly avoid the present presumption
that our policy choices in the
calculable future will need to be made in a
less favorable growth environment than that
of the generation just past. Our problem of
choice will be all the more aggravated if, as
now seems likely, the burden of defense
expenditures must increase.
That means, first, that our further pursuit
of social welfare goals will have to be paid
for out of smaller increments of output and
income. So, there will be a more difficult
problem of choice even if our growth rate
itself were not affected by what we choose.
It means, second, that the impact of our
choices on the measured growth rate itself
becomes a more pressing concern and may
go far to determine whether the projections
now entertained are, indeed, ratified by history
or belied. The new, more confined
growth environment means, third, that the
role of government as a contributor to measured
productivity will also be more vitally
important, not merely insofar as the government
may act to minimize its regulatory or
fiscal impact on private performance, but
also in the support it gives to research, education,
information, labor mobility, and to
human capital formation generally.
As we think about these questions, we
should not be trapped in the grooves of
popular debate. As already said, the alternative
paths to economic progress do not present
us with clear-cut choices between
welfare through government production
guidance and income redistribution on the
one side, and welfare through private productivity
growth on the other. Even if we
cared for little except the private use of
private earnings, we could not ignore the
costs and conflicts arising from the economic
and social displacements which
accompany growth. We could not, for
20For example, in its 1979 Economic Report of the
President, the Council of Economic Advisors estimated
the current trend rate of advance of labor productivity
in the national economy at 1.5 percent a year, corresponding
to 1.75 percent in the private sector, which
is little more than half the postwar pace. In its 1980
Report, moreover, the Council writes: "Since the average
rate of increase during the past 6 years has been
below that figure [of 1.5 percent], the trend rate of
increase [in the national economy] may very well be
still lower, perhaps 1 percent" (p. 88). For further
discussion and other projections, see Fabricant (pp.
63 ff.).