energy, whether in toto (given as -.25), or
for the two components.
This completes my description of the empirical
basis for the MRG procedures and
the premises on which they rest. I want,
in passing, to draw attention at this point
to the econometric aspects of another
study, designed to estimate perceived benefits
of air quality improvements from residential
property values in areas with different
air quality. The study is entitled "The
Costs and Benefits of Automobile Emission
Controls." It draws on a body of
econometric work in which property values
are related to various characteristics of the
site and the neighborhood, including air
quality and other environmental amenities,
and the income of the household.
The foregoing examples lead me to some
broader remarks on the empirical basis of
quantitative economic knowledge in general,
not limited to the type of studies we
are here mostly concerned with.
In all formal procedures involving statistical
testing or estimation, there are explicitly
stated but untested hypotheses,
often called "maintained" hypotheses by
statisticians. In the econometric studies we
have here considered, the "premises" already
discussed play that role. More in
general, any statement resulting from such
studies retains the form of an "if ... then . . ."
statement. The set of "ifs," sometimes called
"the model," is crucial to the meaning of
the "thens," usually but somewhat inaccurately
called the "findings." For instance,
in fitting demand relations, the principal
maintained hypotheses specify the variables
entering into these relations, and possibly
other variables with which these variables
are in turn linked in other pertinent relations.

The "if ... then ..." statements are similar
to those in the formal sciences. They
read like logical or mathematical reasoning
in the case of economic theory, and like applications
of statistical methods in the case
of econometric estimation or testing. The
heart of substantive economics is what can
be learned about the validity of the "ifs"
themselves, including the "premises" discussed
above. "Thens" contradicted by observation
call, as time goes on, for modification
of the list of "ifs" used. Absence of
such contradiction gradually conveys survivor
status to the "ifs" in question. So I do
think a certain record of noncontradiction
gradually becomes one of tentative confirmation.
But the process of confirmation
is slow and diffuse.
For some purposes, and at considerable
expense, short cuts can be made to diminish
the dependence on untested "ifs." I
am speaking of systematic experiments such
as the so-called negative income tax experiment
conducted in New Jersey over the
period 1968-72, and followed by similar income
maintenance experiments in other
areas of the United States. If one wants to
know whether income maintenance payments
to families near the poverty line have
a disincentive effect, or no effect, or even a
positive incentive effect on labor supply,
one does not need to have a pretested theory
as to what, if anything, the family is maximizing.
Instead, one can make such payments
to a sample of families and compare
its behavior with that of an unaided
control group. This is what the New Jersey
experiment did. In one category of families
where the numbers spoke rather clearlywhite
husband-and-wife whole familiesthe
effect on labor supply was found to be
negative, moderate but statistically significant,
and with the effect on the husband's
labor supply smaller than that on the wife's.
In addition, much was learned about the design,
conduct, and evaluation of such experiments
for use in later studies.
There have not been many such experiments
on a scale needed to obtain statistically
significant outcomes. Moreover,
they have been limited to questions of
great and urgent policy importance. Meanwhile,
we do need to find ways in which
verification of the premises of economics,
through cumulative econometric analyses
and through experiments that find a sponsor,
can be pursued.
I have not found in the literature a persuasive
account of how such confirmation
of premises can be perceived and documented.