Three sets of research efforts can be singled
out as having been particularly useful in in-
forming changes in policy, although others,
no doubt, also contributed.42 First, there was
research analyzing how import-substitution
policies were actually working. Second, and
not unrelated to the first, there was the refine-
ment and more appropriate interpretation of
theory. Third, there was research demonstrat-
ing the feasibility of the alternative.
A. Challenging the Stylized Facts and
Understanding How Import-Substitution
Regimes Worked
Analyses of the evidence regarding the key
stylized facts were in hindsight important steps
in undermining the intellectual consensus.
Demonstration that there were significant re-
sponses to incentives undermined the policy
case for ignoring prices. Proof that the terms
of trade had deteriorated very little, if at all,
began to undermine export pessimism.
Empirical work on the ways in which
import-substitution regimes functioned was
crucial. Comparative analyses such as those
of Little et al. (1970), Bhagwati (1978),
Krueger ( 1978, 1983 ), and Michael Michaely
et al. ( 1991 ) clearly contributed signifi-
cantly to awareness that the effects of import-
substitution policies were not idiosyncratic to
individual countries. The comparative studies
provided a great deal of evidence as to the
shortcomings of reliance on import substitu-
tion. Evidence that protection was not tem-
porary, that protection levels were high and
idiosyncratic, that there was very great dis-
crimination against exports, and that "foreign
exchange shortage" was a function of policies
and not an exogenously given datum, were all
important in challenging the protectionist trade
policies still prevailing in most developing
countries in the 1980's.
If one considered the evidence regarding the
workings of trade policies in any one country
taken alone, there were ample grounds for crit-
icism of inner-oriented trade policies, with the
monopoly positions they conferred on domes-
tic producers, the high costs of doing business,
rent-seeking low quality of products, and so
on. It was possible, however, to recognize that
and nonetheless conclude that policy makers
in that particular country had been inept, or
had simply failed to implement policies appro-
priately. As evidence mounted across coun-
tries, the similarity in the evolution of regimes
and their consequences was striking. It was in-
creasingly difficult to dismiss the evidence
from a particular country as being sui generis
or the failing only of the particulars of policy
execution in that country.
But, underpinning the analyses of indivi-
dual country situations, either in the compar-
ative studies or individually, were agreed-upon
measurement tools. The empirical studies
could not have had their impact without the
development and use of measurement tools.
As cost-benefit techniques were used, it be-
came increasingly difficult to justify some
highly uneconomic projects. And, as measure-
ment of effective rates of protection was un-
dertaken in country after country, the high and
erratic nature of protection became evident.
Techniques for cost-benefit analysis and mea-
surement of effective rates of protection were
important, first of all, in providing analysts
with tools with which to demonstrate the cha-
otic nature of import-substitution policies. In
addition, even before the policy consensus
changed, there is little doubt that some of the
earlier extreme irrationalities of policy were
curbed through use of these tools. It became
extremely difficult to defend the high average
of, and wide variance in, effective rates of
protection.
At an empirical level, it seems clear that early
demonstrations of the great range of variation in
rates of effective protection were useful both in
demonstrating some of the problems with trade
regimes and also in preventing at least a few of
the worst excesses that might otherwise have oc-
cuffed. More generally, recognition and rein-
troduction of the proposition that there is a