It is tempting to use the audience captured
by a presidential address to pontificate about
the sad state of economics. You probably
will conclude that I have surrendered to the
temptation. But I do recognize that my good
luck in becoming president of our Association
does not automatically endow me with
commanding wisdom over all of economics.
I will do my best to stick to my knitting.
And for many years much of my research
has been directly toward investment in human
capital and the understanding of family
behavior.

Modern economists neglected the behavior
of families until the 1950s. Since then
economic analysis has been used to explain
who marries whom and when (if ever) they
divorce, the number of children and investments
in each child's human capital, the
extent and timing of labor force participation
by married women, when elderly parents
rely on children for support, and many other
family choices. A fair conclusion, I believe
(need I remind you of my biases?), is that
the economic approach contributes important
insights toward explaining the large decline
in birth rates during the past 100 years,
the rapid expansion in the labor force participation
of married women after the 1950s,
the explosive advance in divorce rates during
the past two decades, and other major
changes in the family. Family economics is
now a respectable and growing field.
Yet perhaps because family economics is a
new field, only a small literature considers
the implications for other parts of economics.
The family is such an important
institution that progress in understanding
how it behaves is justification enough for
any discipline. But most economists, including
the audience here, are not particularly
concerned about family behavior. Your interest
must be stimulated through a demonstration
that its study helps in the analysis of
other problems.

In this address I try to maintain your
interest by exploring the contribution to
macroeconomics from the progress in family
economics. This is a challenge not only because
macro behavior is a central part of
economics but also because its link to the
family may seem remote and unimportant.
By macroeconomics I mean the analysis of
economywide behavior. Much of the time is
spent on long-term economic growth, although
I also discuss short and long cycles in
economic activity, and the interaction between
overlapping generations through Social
Security, transmission of inequality, and
in other ways.

Of course, one paper even by a macro
expert cannot do justice to these topics, and
I do not pretend to be such an expert. My
purpose is to help you recognize that many
conclusions in these and presumably other
macro areas change radically when family
choices get the attention they deserve. I
apologize for the technical nature of some of
the discussion that may seem out of place in
a presidential address.

I. The Malthusian and Neoclassical Models
In considering the relation between economic
growth and the family, it is natural to
begin with Thomas Malthus's great contribution.
Although usually called the Malthusian
theory of population growth, a more
appropriate name is the Malthusian theory