Diversity is the staff of economic life. Interpersonal
differences in tastes and talents,
whether naturally endowed or environmentally
produced, give us the unique "propensity to
truck, barter, and trade" that improves our standards
of living. Every elementary economics
student knows how different endowments in an
exchange economy create potential gains from
trade, and how competitive markets efficiently
intermediate and exhaust those gains. In production
activities, work is organized in highly
specialized ways to use our human resources to
the fullest.
All this is so elementary that economists
largely take it for granted, yet much of the
complexity of modem economic life is built
upon these foundations. The variety of choices
that confront us is astonishing. No consumer
buys more than a tiny fraction of goods that are
available to be purchased. The average person is
unable to identify by name more than a handful
of goods because most are irrelevant to anyone'
s personal economic behavior. And in work
activities, each of us masters hardly any of the
immense varieties of skill required in a modem
economy. Out of the totality of what is known
by society at large, a single person knows practically
nothing, no matter how well educated or
how brilliant! Work and production knowledge
are even more specialized than consumption
choices and activities.
How do decentralized markets accommodate
the diversity of choices, tastes, and productivities
that are so important in economic affairs?
The choice of quantities (the intensive margin)
by a typical buyer or seller has dominated neoclassical
economics. Most of price theory focuses
on the determination of price and
quantities of already-defined goods, but does
little to examine the extensive margin by which
the nature of the goods is chosen. Price theory
does not provide a rich enough structure to
analyze these issues, which require a framework
that takes heterogeneity and diversity as a fundamental,
primitive construct. Location or spatial
theory is specifically designed for that task.
It is a theory of choice based on interpersonal
differences in willingness to pay for differentiated
objects perhaps best known from Adam
Smith's theory of equalizing differences.' Differentiated
products are valued according to
their various qualities and product characteristics.
Comparing reservation prices with market
prices determines specific choices of buyers and
sellers out of the vast varieties that are available.
Many successful examples have clarified
how spatial models can be applied to the economics
of variety and diversity.
Much of my research reflects my attempts
over the years to work out some of the economic
issues associated with diversity and the
implications of heterogeneity for markets and
prices.2 There are three main themes: the determination
of value in the presence of diversity,
the sorting or allocation of diverse buyers to
diverse sellers, and the effects of heterogeneity
and sorting on inequality.
I. Value, Assignment, and Inequality
How do markets accommodate inherent differences
in goods, jobs, and productive talents
of people? How are these things valued? Just as
the value of land depends on its location, it is
often possible to think of goods, jobs, and people
in terms of their addresses in a map of
productive attributes or characteristics. Some
addresses are more desirable than others and
market prices equate the supply and demand for