1974, 1975, and 1976.
Their reasoning seems to go along the following
lines. The natural rate hypothesis implies
that the rate of inflation can change only when
employment deviates from the natural rate. Now
suppose we start from the natural rate and some
corresponding steady rate of inflation, which
without loss of generality can be assumed as
zero. Let there be an exogenous shock which
initially lifts the rate of inflation, say, to 10 percent.
If the Central Bank, by accommodating
this price rise, keeps employment at the natural
rate, the new rate of 10 percent will also be maintained
and will in fact continue forever, as long
as the money supply accommodates it. The only
way to eliminate inflation is to increase unemployment
enough, above the natural rate and for
a long enough time, so that the cumulated reduction
of inflation takes us back to zero. There
will of course be many possible unemployment
paths that will accomplish this. So the next
question is: Which is the least undesirable?
The monetarist answer seems to be-and
here I confess that attribution becomes difficult
-that it does not make much difference because,
to a first approximation, the cumulated
amount of unemployment needed to unwind
inflation is independent of the path. If we take
more unemployment early, we need to take less
later, and conversely. But then it follows immediately
that the specific path of unemployment
that would be generated by a constant money
growth is, if not better, at least as good as any
other. Corollary: a constant growth of money is
a satisfactory answer to supply shocks just as it
is to demand shocks-as well as, one may suspect,
to any other conceivable illness, indisposition,
or disorder.
D. Why Constant Money Growth Cannot
Be the Answer
This reasoning is admirably simple and elegant,
but it suffers from several flaws. The first
one is a confusion between the price level and
its rate of change. With an unchanged constant
growth of the nominal money stock, the system
will settle back into equilibrium not when the
rate of inflation is back to zero but only when,
in addition, the price level itself is back to its
initial level. This means that when inflation has
finally returned back to the desired original rate,
unemployment cannot also be back to the original
level but will instead remain above it as long
as is necessary to generate enough deflation to
offset the earlier cumulated inflation. I doubt that
this solution would find many supporters and for
a good reason; it amounts to requiring that none
of the burden of the price shock should fall on
the holder of long-term money fixed contractssuch
as debts-and that all other sectors of society
should shoulder entirely whatever cost is
necessary to insure this result. But if, as seems
to be fairly universally agreed, the social target
is instead to return the system to the original rate
of inflation-zero in our example-then the
growth of the money supply cannot be kept constant.
Between the time the shock hits and the
time inflation has returned to the long-run level,
there must be an additional increase in money
supply by as much as the price level or by the
cumulant of inflation over the path.
A second problem with the monetarists' argument
is that it implies a rather special preference
function that depends only on cumulated unemployment.
And, last but not least, it requires the
heroic assumption that the Phillips curve be not
only vertical in the long run but also linear in the
short run, an assumption that does not seem
consistent with empirically estimated curves.
Dropping this last assumption has the effect that,
for any given social preference, there will be in
general a unique optimal path. Clearly, for this
path to be precisely that generated by a constant
money growth, would require a miracle-or
some sleight of the invisible hand!
Actually, there are grounds for holding that
the unemployment path generated by a constant
money growth, even if temporarily raised to take
care of the first flaw, could not possibly be close
to an optimal. This conclusion is based on an
analysis of optimal paths, relying on the type of
linear welfare function that appears to underlie
the monetarists' argument, and which is also a
straightforward generalization of Okun's famous