and any attempt to improve their design, should
take these effects into account.
There is, of course, controversy about the
magnitude of these effects, just as there is about
most other economic parameters. Decisions
about program design have to use the evidence
that is available, even if parameter estimates
come with substantial uncertainty. But there is
clearly room for economists to use new data,
new statistical methods, and new natural policy
experiments to improve our knowledge and,
therefore, to improve policy design.
Adverse effects result from specific program
designs and are not inherent in the goals of the
programs. For example, John Gruber and David
Wise (1999) showed that the rules governing
retirement benefits induced early retirement in
several European countries but that different
rules at different times and in other countries
did not induce early retirement. The U.S. benefit
rules that now specify an almost actuarially fair
relationship between benefits and retirement
age reduces substantially the perceived bias in
favor of early retirement.
More generally, social insurance programs
not only distort economic behavior directly,
thereby creating deadweight losses, but also
create further deadweight losses because of the
taxes that are levied to finance those programs.
I believe that the deadweight losses of those taxes
are much larger than is generally recognized.
I will illustrate this with the effect of the
50-percent increase in the payroll tax rate that
could occur if there is no change in benefit
rules. Deadweight losses depend on marginal
tax rates. Consider an individual who now faces
a combined federal and state marginal rate of
income tax of 30 percent without social insurance.
The current 15.3 percent employeremployee
payroll tax rate,6 when adjusted for
the interaction with the income tax7 and for the
present actuarial value of the additional retiree
and survivor benefits that result from increased
taxable earnings, now increases the overall marginal
tax rate from 30 percent to about 37.7
percent.8 A 50-percent rise in the 15.3 percent
marginal tax rate, adjusted for the income tax
interaction, would increase this effective marginal
tax rate from 37.7 percent to 44.2
percent.9
The increase in the deadweight loss that
would result from this tax increase reflects both
the reduction in labor supply-broadly defined
to include not just working hours but also the
accumulation of human capital, the choice of
occupation, effort, etc., and the change in the
form of compensation-away from taxable cash
and to less valuable fringe benefits. Although
neither behavioral change can be measured explicitly,
the resulting deadweight loss can be
calculated empirically by estimating the extent
to which the higher payroll tax would reduce
taxable labor income. It is appropriate to focus
on the decline in taxable labor income without
evaluating the two separate effects because the
relative price of the two components-the marginal
tax rate on the reward for increased labor
supply and the marginal tax rate that determines
the net cost to the taxpayer of fringe benefitsremains
the same when the tax rate changes.
Taxable labor income is, therefore, a Hicksian
composite good that can be used to assess the
deadweight loss (Feldstein, 1999a).10
6 The 15.3 percent rate includes Medicare as well as the
Social Security pension and disability taxes. Currently the
pension and survivor insurance portion is 10.6 percent of
taxable payroll. The disability tax is 1.8 percent and the
Medicare portion is 2.9 percent. The costs of these three
components will rise at different speeds but the combined
cost will eventually increase the required tax to 150 percent
of the 15.3 percent rate.
7 Since the employer half of the 15.3 percent payroll tax
is excluded from the personal income tax base, the effective
marginal rate of tax in this example is 30 percent plus the
7.65 percent paid by the employee plus 70 percent of the
7.65 percent payroll tax paid by the employer: 0.30 +
0.0765 + 0.70(0.0765) = 0.43. The extent to which a labor
supply response causes the tax to be shifted does not alter
the appropriate calculation of the marginal tax rate.
8 Feldstein and Samwick (1992) show that the present
actuarial value of the incremental benefits varies substantially
among different age and demographic groups, from no
value for young workers and some married women to more
than a 100 percent offset of the incremental tax for older
men with dependent wives. If this offset is approximated by
50 percent of the 10.6 percent of the old age and survivors
portion of the tax, the 43 percent marginal tax rate calcu-
lated in footnote 8 is reduced to 37.7 percent.
9 The increase in the payroll tax rate is subject to the
income tax offset (reducing the additional 7.65 percent to
6.5 percent). There is no incremental benefit associated with
the higher tax rate.
10 The situation is more complex when we deal with
taxes on capital income. These distort choices among finan-
cial instruments by both issuers and purchasers, choices
about the form of business (corporate vs. non-corporate,
domestic vs. foreign) and choices about saving vs. spend-
ing. The key elasticity that matters in the saving vs. spend-