of a production function, some sort of limited
relationship between inputs and outputs
as expressed in the great biblical
principle that grapes are not gathered
from thorns, or figs from thistles (Matthew
7:16). There are production functions
not only for grapes and figs, but also
for goods and bads, and indeed for the ultimate
Good. We dispute about what is
good, about what outputs we want as a result
of the inputs we put in. We dispute
also however about the nature of the production
functions themselves, what inputs
in fact will produce what outputs. In the
case of physical production functions the
problems can be resolved fairly easily by
experimenting, even though there are
some pretty doubtful cases, as in the case
of cloud seedings, which do not seem to be
demonstrably more effective than rain
dances. In the case of moral production
functions, however, the functions themselves
are much in dispute, and there may
indeed be more disputation about the production
functions than there is about the
nature of the desired outputs themselves.
I was impressed some years ago, when engaged
in a long arduous seminar with
some young Russians and young Americans
with how easy it was to agree on ultimate
goals, even across these widely divergent
ideologies, and how extraordinarily
hard it was to agree about the inputs
which are likely to produce these ultimate
goals.

There is a problem here in human
learning of how do we get to know the
moral production functions in the complex
melee of social, political, and economic
life, when it seems to be pervaded
throughout with a note of almost cosmic
irony in which almost everything we do
turns out different from what we expect
because of our ignorance, so that both the
bad and the good we do is all too often
unintentional. I cannot solve this enistemological
problem in one short paper, but
I recommend it as a major intellectual
challenge to the moral sciences. What I
am concerned with here is with economics
as an input into this moral production
function. Does economics, as George Stigler
has suggested, make people conservative
[3]? If so, it is perhaps because it
simply points out the difficulties and dangers
of heroic action and makes people appreciate
the productivity of the commonplace,
of exchange and finance, of bankers
and businessmen, even of the middle class
which our heroic young so earnestly despise.
Perhaps this is why so many young
radiCals today have abandoned economics
as a poisoned apple of rationality which
corrupts the pure and heroic man of their
identities and sympathlies. Economics is a
reconciler, it brings together the ideologies
of East and West, it points up the many
common problems which they have, it is
corrosive of ideologies and disputes that
are not worth their costs. Even as it acts
as a reconciler, however, does it not undermine
that heroic demand for social mutation
which will not be stilled in the
voices of our young radicals?
I confess I have been deeply disturbed
when I have asked myself these questions
and I have no easy answers to them. Nevertheless,
I am not sorry that I became an
economist, for to belong to a body of people
who have never even thought of introducing
malevolence into their social
theory is somehow in this day and age a
little cheering. The anxieties, the moral
anguish, and the intense dispute which
has racked the American Economic Association
this year and which is symbolized
by the question as to whether we should
move our meeting from Chicago is symptomatic
of the fact that not even the study
of economics can turn people into purely
economic men. Strangely enough it was
the mathematical economists and econometricians