Macroeconomics was born as a distinct field
in the 1940's, as a part of the intellectual response
to the Great Depression. The term then
referred to the body of knowledge and expertise
that we hoped would prevent the recurrence of
that economic disaster. My thesis in this lecture
is that macroeconomics in this original sense
has succeeded: Its central problem of depression
prevention has been solved, for all practical
purposes, and has in fact been solved for many
decades. There remain important gains in welfare
from better fiscal policies, but I argue that
these are gains from providing people with better
incentives to work and to save, not from
better fine-tuning of spending flows. Taking
U.S. performance over the past 50 years as a
benchmark, the potential for welfare gains from
better long-run, supply-side policies exceeds by
far the potential from further improvements in
short-run demand management.
My plan is to review the theory and evidence
leading to this conclusion. Section I outlines the
general logic of quantitative welfare analysis, in
which policy comparisons are reduced to differences
perceived and valued by individuals. It
also provides a brief review of some examples-
examples that will be familiar to
many-of changes in long-run monetary and
fiscal policies that consumers would view as
equivalent to increases of 5-15 percent in their
overall consumption levels.
Section II describes a thought-experiment in
which a single consumer is magically relieved
of all consumption variability about trend. How
much average consumption would he be willing
t

o give up in return? About one-half of onetenth
of a percent, I calculate. I will defend this
estimate as giving the right order of magnitude
of the potential gain to society from improved
stabilization policies, but to do this, many questions
need to be addressed.

How much of aggregate consumption variability
should be viewed as pathological? How
much can or should be removed by monetary
and fiscal means? Section III reviews evidence
bearing on these questions. Section IV considers
attitudes toward risk: How much do people
dislike consumption uncertainty? How much
would they pay to have it reduced? We also
know that business-cycle risk is not evenly distributed
or easily diversified, so welfare cost
estimates that ignore this fact may badly understate
the costs of fluctuations. Section V reviews
recently developed models that let us explore
this possibility systematically. These are hard
questions, and definitive answers are too much
to ask for. But I argue in the end that, based on
what we know now, it is unrealistic to hope for
gains larger than a tenth of a percent from better
countercyclical policies.
I. Welfare Analysis of Public Policies:
Logic and Results

Suppose we want to compare the effects of
two policies, A and B say, on a single consumer.
Under policy A the consumer's welfare is
U(CA), where CA is the consumption level he
enjoys under that policy, and under policy B it
is U(CB). Suppose that he prefers cB: U(CA) <
U(csB). Let A > 0 solve

U((l + A)CA) = U(CB).

We call this number A-in units of a percentage
of all consumption goods-the welfare gain of
a change in policy from A to B. To evaluate the
effects of policy change on many different consumers,
we can calculate welfare gains (perhaps
losses, for some) for all of them, one at a time,
and add the needed compensations to obtain the