I want to use this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity
for pontificating to the profession,
to explore ways of improving the interaction
between what economists do and the political
process. Tension and conflict are, of
course, inherent in political decisions, especially
on economic policy. Nothing can make
such decisions easy. Nevertheless, it is my
contention that economic policymaking in
Washington in the last decade has been more
frustrating, muddled, and confusing than
necessary. Some of the fault lies with
economists and economics; some with politicians
and the political process; some in the
interactions. I want to offer some suggestions
for modest improvements.

Most economists probably share my premise
that economics ultimately ought to be
more than just challenging intellectual gymnastics.
It ought to help us understand how
the economy works and provide a basis for
intelligent political choices among economic
policies. Even those who devote their energies
to resolving purely theoretical issues
imagine that somehow in the end their efforts
will prove socially useful.
The dedicated, idealistic young economist
who aspires to advise a government may well
envision herself someday as the wise and
impartial adviser to the philosopher queen.
In this daydream, the adviser presents the
best forecasts that can be made of the future
course of the economy. She explains the
macroeconomic policy options and what is
likely to happen if each is undertaken. She
elucidates why market solutions are efficient,
when markets are likely to fail, and what can
be done when this occurs. She identifies risks
and uncertainties, which fortunately are not
overwhelming. She represents the best professional
judgment of her fellow economists,
indicating the major respects in which most
economists agree and scrupulously pointing
out that in minor respects the views of some
of her professional colleagues might differ
from her own. She remains above the political
fray, identifying any values or distributional
biases that may creep into her
judgments and eschewing identification with
interest groups or ideological causes.
The queen for her part listens carefully
and intelligently, asks thoughtful questions,
and weighs the options. She may consult
other experts on noneconomic aspects of the
decisions, but these can be assumed not to
be very important. She then makes final
decisions-even very hard ones-and sticks
to them. The decisions are carried out, the
economy prospers, and a grateful nation applauds
the wisdom of the monarch and her
economist and the usefulness of economics.
But in the real world, both economics and
politics are frustratingly unlike this picture.
Both are pluralistic in the extreme and appear
to be getting more so. Economists and
political leaders not only miscQmmunicate,
but each accuses the other of incompetence,
obfuscation, self-serving motives, and antisocial
behavior.

Economists, of course, do not wait for
others to attack them; they do it themselves.
Walter Heller said in his presidential address
that the "chorus of self criticism has risen to
a new crescendo" (1975, p. 1), and the selfdeprecation
has not abated in the intervening
decade. If a golden age of economists'
self-confidence ever occurred, it is long past.
Events of recent years have kept reminding
us that our national economy is diverse and
complex, battered by unpredictable shocks,
and increasingly interconnected with the even