incorporated in the tax law as part of the
computation of real capital gains and losses,
real interest income expense, and real inventory
and depreciation allowances. The adjustment
of interest is admittedly difficult,
but the widespread use of computers should
ease the administrative and compliance
problems.
Restoration of a tax differential between
capital gains and ordinary income should be
resisted at all costs. Equalization of the tax
rates lowers the incentive to convert other
income into capital gains, simplifies business
and financial decisions, and reduces income
tax complexity. Aside from the correction
for inflation, the one additional reform
needed in the capital gains tax is to include
in the tax base unrealized capital gains
transferred by gift or at death. Taxing such
gains would reduce the lock-in effect of the
tax on transfers of assets and eliminate a
source of horizontal inequity.
A major neglected problem in most countries
is the erosion of the tax base from the
exclusion of employee fringe benefits. Trade
unions, as well as employers, staunchly defend
the continued exclusion of fringe benefit
income, but in fact the largest subsidies
go to the highest paid employees. Loopholes
for union members and other workers are no
more defensible than those for the rich. Taxation
of fringe benefits would encourage their
conversion into cash compensation, thus giving
employees more control over the disposition
of their income and the choice of the
providers of their services. Australia and New
Zealand have shown the way to reform in
this area by taxing fringe benefits (other
than contributions to pension plans) at the
corporate tax rate. This method of handling
a difficult, but urgent, problem is simple and
effective.
Social Security benefits continue to receive
favorable treatment, even though the elderly
can no longer be regarded as a disadvantaged
group. Under current law, the medical
insurance subsidies they receive are not subject
to tax, and less than half of retirement
and disability benefits is taxable to married
couples with income above $32,000 ($25,000
if single). The value of the medical insurance  subsidies should be subject to tax in full"4
and retirement and disability benefits should
be treated like private pensions without any
income thresholds, which would mean that
roughly 85 percent of the benefits would be
currently taxable.
The treatment of owner-occupied housing
remains unsatisfactory. I assume that the
exclusion of imputed rent from the tax base
and the deduction of mortgage interest by
most homeowners are sacrosanct, but it is
possible to limit the encouragement of borrowing
without promoting rearrangements of
debt for tax purposes. The solution is to
broaden the limitation on deductions of investment
interest to include all interest payments.
That is, a deduction for all interest
payments would be allowed, but limited to
the amount of reported investment income.
To accommodate the home-owner lobby, the
limit could be raised to net investment plus
an arbitrary amount, say, $10,000-enough
to take care of the vast majority of home
owners. The broader interest limitation
would remove the discrimination against
borrowing for other purposes and the incentive
to substitute home equity loans for other
types of borrowing.
Deductions other than for interest are still
too generous. The Simons' definition of income
includes all sources of income, without
any deductions for the uses of that income.
For equity reasons, it is appropriate to permit
deductions for such unusual expenses as
medical payments and casualty losses. I
would retain the deduction for state income
taxes to moderate interstate tax differentials.
42 However, the property tax is
largely a benefit tax and therefore should not
be deductible. Nor is it necessary to allow a
deduction for the first dollar of charitable
contributions on incentive grounds. Little or