porary resistance to money wage decline
reflect money illusion in some sense. Such
an assertion would have to be based on an
extension of the domain of well-defined
rational behavior to cover responses to
change, adjustment speeds, costs of information,
costs of organizing and operating
markets, and a host of other problems
in dynamic theory. These theoretical extensions
are in their infancy, although
much work of interest and promise is being
done. Meanwhile, I doubt that significant
restrictions on disequilibrium adjustment
mechanisms can be deduced from first
principles.
Why are the wage aind salary rates of
employed workers so insensitive to the
availability of potential replacements?
One reason is that the employer makes
some explicit or implicit commitments in
putting a worker on the payroll in the
first place. The employee expects that his
wages and terms of employment will
steadily improve, certainly never retrogress.
He expects that the employer will
pay him the rate prevailing for persons of
comparable skill, occupation, experience,
and seniority. He expects such commitments
in return for his own investments in
the job; arrangements for residence, transportation,
and personal life involve set-up
costs which will be wasted if the job turns
sour. The market for labor services is not
like a market for fresh produce where the
entire current supply is auctioned daily.
It is more like a rental housing market,
in which most existing tenancies are the
continuations of long-term relationships
governed by contracts or less formal understandings.

Employers and workers alike regard the
wages of comparable labor elsewhere as a
standard, but what determines those reference
wages? There is not even an auction
where workers and employers unbound by
existing relationships and commitments
meet and determine a market-clearing
wage. If such markets existed, they would
provide competitively determined guides
for negotiated and administered wages,
just as stock exchange prices are reference
points for stock transactions elsewhere.
In labor markets the reverse is closer to
the truth. Wage rates for existing employees
set the standards for new employees,
too.
The equilibrium components of wage
increases, it has been argued, depend on
past wage increases throughout the economy.
In those theoretical and econometric
models of inflation where labor
markets are aggregated into a single
market, this relationship is expressed as
an autoregressive equation of fixed structure:
current wage increase depends on
past wage increases. The same description
applies when past wage increases enter indirectly,
mediated by price inflation and
productivity change. The process of mutual
interdependence of market wages is a
good deal more complex and less mechanical
than these aggregated models suggest.
Reference standards for wages differ
from market to market. The equilibrium
wage increase in each market will be some
function of past wages in all markets, and
perhaps of past prices too. But the function
need not be the same in every market.
Wages of workers contiguous in geography
industry, and skill will be heavily weighted.
Imagine a wage pattern matrix of coefficients
describing the dependence of the
percentage equilibrium wage increase in
each market on the past increases in all
other markets. The coefficients in each row
are non-negative and sum to one, but their
distribution across markets and time lags
will differ from row to row.
Consider the properties of such a system
in the absence of disequilibrium inputs.
First, the system has the "natural rate"
property that its steady state is indeterminate.
Any rate of wage increase that has
been occurring in all markets for a long
enough time will continue. Second, from
irregular initial conditions the system will