cost reductions and high rates of return create
attractive investment opportunities which,
when acted upon, bring about a high capital
contribution to growth. It should be no surprise
that under such circumstances the GDP growth
rate itself tends to be high. It should likewise
be no surprise that the opposite syndrome
with weak real cost reductions and low rates
of return producing fewer interesting invest-
ment opportunities-should end up being as-
sociated with a low capital contribution and a
low GDP growth rate.
Finally, we come to the residual R' itself.
To me, the biggest message here is to recog-
nize the multiplicity of sources from which it
can (and I believe does) come, and the addi-
tivity that nevertheless is its attribute. I think
that the term real cost reduction very neatly
captures both these aspects in a way that ren-
ders it preferable to terms like TFP improve-
ment and technical advance-preferable not
in the sense of a mechanical definition (for
which all three are equally good), but in the
sense of better conveying the underlying na-
ture of the process to one's listeners or readers.
The next step is to recognize that of the five
main pillars, at least three (the rate of invest-
ment, the rate of return, and real cost re-
duction) are key foci of decision-making
processes at the level of the firm. I cannot es-
cape the conclusion that the great bulk of the
action associated with the growth process
takes place at the level of the firm. Hence, I
feel we should focus much more study than
we have in the past on what happens at this
level. And when we are not working at the firm
level, we should pay a lot of attention to what
happens at lesser levels of disaggregation like
industries and industrial branches.
Key insights flow from taking this kind of
focus. Few economists are aware of the per-
vasiveness with which sunrise-sunset dia-
grams are characterized by overshooting, or of
the importance that firms or industries with
real cost increases (i.e., reductions in TFP)
play in determining the aggregate rates of real
cost reduction that we see in such diagrams.
Here we have only scratched the surface in
digesting the evidence. But I find impressive
the degree to which the data of Table 3 seem
to point to a growth syndrome in which high
rates of return, high rates of investment, high
rates of real cost reduction, and high rates of
output growth all go together. I see in this re-
sult the likelihood that real cost reductions are
the big driving force, generating high rates of
return and calling forth high rates of invest-
ment and high output growth. This interpre-
tation is compatible with many exercises that
I have perforned over the years in which I
have tried to contrast high-growth with low-
growth experiences. In such exercises, as in
Table 3, the difference in rates of real cost re-
duction has typically been a major "source"
of the difference in growth rates.
Also impressive in the analysis of the
Jorgenson data is the degree to which the vary-
ing experiences of U.S. manufacturing in dif-
ferent decades derives from different degrees
of bad experience (real cost increases) rather
than different degrees of good experience (real
cost reduction). It is as if the creative part of
Schumpeter's "creative destruction" was
more steady (for these decades in U.S. man-
ufacturing) than the destructive part, whetting
our (or at least my) appetite to look deeper,
inquiring into why this was so.
The Mexican data at the firm level were
somewhat more recalcitrant than the Jorgenson
data by industrial branch, but they nonetheless
give us a clear picture of lots of winners and
lots of losers, with the losers being strongly
characterized by falling real value added and/
or by falling real rates of return.4