This lecture proceeds in the following way. I
show that for most of human history, life was
both short and difficult for the vast majority of
the world's people, that food supply was a major
factor affecting population size, and that
consumption-nonfood as well as food-was
very limited. I shall then turn to the question of
how the developed world escaped from the
Malthusian trap during the nineteenth century
and how the developing world did so more than
a century later.
I emphasize three major factors that I consider
responsible for the remarkable period of
economic growth that has occurred over the past
two or three centuries that permitted breaking
free from the limits imposed by the food supply.
The first factor is the significant advances in
agricultural productivity in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. The increase in agricultural
productivity made possible the development
of cities as the major focus of further
economic development and growth. The second
factor is the enormous increase in knowledge
over the past two centuries made possible by
increasing population and rising real per capita
incomes resulting from the economic growth
from the mid-eighteenth century. The increase
in real incomes permitted the allocation of substantial
resources to the creation of knowledge.
This reallocation was associated with the rapid
development of two institutions- universities
and research institutes. The third factor, contrary
to what is often assumed, is that the response
of families to the removal of restraints
on their well-being imposed by limited food
supplies was not significantly increased fertility;
population growth resulted primarily from
mortality declines. Population growth was not
limited by the supply of food but by the decisions
of families.
The three reasons do not fully explain why
population growth did not spoil everything for
the developed world in the nineteenth century
and for the developing world more recently.
One reason the growth of food output in the
nineteenth century may not have been overwhelmed
by population growth was that knowledge
and technology required for the rapid
reduction of mortality did not become generally
available until near the end of the nineteenth
century and, further, the rapid increase in the
population of cities limited the decline in mortality.
The decline in mortality in the developing
world in the twentieth century was far more
rapid and resulted in a much higher rate of
population growth than the experience of the
nineteenth century even though fertility declined
significantly.
II. Agriculture and Food Before the
Nineteenth Century
Agriculture is a relatively recent inventionthe
transformation from hunting and gathering
to planting and growing crops and domesticating
animals probably occurred about 10 millennia
ago. At that time the world's population was
about 4 million and a large fraction of all resources
were devoted to obtaining food, and a
very poor lot it was.
As of 1800 it is estimated that '75 to 80
percent of the working population in the developed
world was engaged in agriculture (Bairoch,
1988 p. 287). In the rest of the world, with
nearly 80 percent of the world's population, the
percentage of workers engaged in agriculture
was certainly higher-of the order of 85 to 90
percent. In 1891, 90 percent of the population of
India was rural (Adna Ferrin Weber, 1899 p.
124) and as late as 1949, 89 percent of China's
population was rural.2 Unfortunately we do not
have evidence that permits -us to directly determine
the amount of food available in ancient
times. But if life expectancy in Roman times
were 25 years (Donald J. Bogue, 1969 p. 566),
it is highly probable that the available food per
capita was very limited. Fogel has estimated the
2 To say that a high percentage of the working population
was engaged in agriculture does not mean that this
was the share of labor time devoted to the production of
agricultural products. Prior to the nineteenth century,
farm families were largely self-sufficient and had to
devote a significant percentage of their labor to provide
for their housing, to collect fuel, and to make their own
clothing, bedding and furniture, and most of the simple
tools and equipment that they used on the farm and in the
house. In temperate climatic zones much of this work
may have occurred during the colder periods when little
or no farm work could be done, other than caring for
animals. The percentage of the labor force engaged in
agriculture is a rough inverse indicator of the percentage
of their food production that they could sell to nonfarmers.
If 80 percent of the population were engaged in
agriculture, they could sell or trade approximately a fifth
of the food they produced.