prospective accounting period would be issued
to each firm on the basis of the gross
markups for a corresponding preceding period,
plus or minus adjustments for changes
in prime inputs such as labor and invested
capital. These warrants would be issued in
sufficient total face value to correspond to
the value at a desired price level of the
output expected to be produced by the inputs
against which the warrants were issued.
They would be freely tradable for cash in a
competitive market, and if at the end of the
accounting period a firm is found to have
retained or acquired fewer warrants than
the actual amount of its gross markups for
the period, a penalty tax would be assessed.
This tax would not be a substantial source
of revenue, but would serve merely as an
enforcement device. It could be set at a
level fairly certain to be higher than the
market price of the warrants.
Adjustment of the warrant issue for
changes in investment could be made simply
on the basis of a uniform percentage of
such change. Adjustment for changes in employment
is somewhat more difficult: a flat
amount per employee or man-hour takes
too little account of variations in qualifications,
while to allow adjustments equal to
payrolls would run a danger of allowing
inflationary wage increases. Some formula
such as a percentage of payrolls plus a flat
amount per employee might be satisfactory;
such a formula would involve a certain bias
in favor of the employment of low-skill labor,
which may be considered desirable in
view of the fact that this is where the unemployment
problem is most serious.

Administration would seem to pose no
insurmountable problems. Determination of
gross markups is essentially no different than
the assessment of a value-added tax such as
is widespread in Europe. Adjustment for
investment can be made on the basis of
accounts already needed for income-tax
purposes, while adjustments for employment
can be related to the social-security
records. Some special methods may have to
be developed for dealing with the selfemployed
and very small firms, and possibly
some classes of firms could be excluded
from the scheme, as is sometimes done with
the value-added tax.

XII. Prospects for Rapidly Reaching
Genuine Full Employment

With such a scheme in place, what can we
plan for in terms of getting from where we
are to full employment? Currently unemployment
is reported as about 7.5 percent,
and full employment can be reckoned at
about 1.5 percent, giving a slack to be made
up of 6 percent. Using Okun's ratio of percentage
change in GNP to percentage
change in reported unemployment of 2.5,
we have a slack of 15 percent to be made
up. If this slack can be taken up within two
years, this will be 7.5 percent per year; if to
this we add 2.5 percent for growth in the
labor force and in productivity, we get 10-
percent annual growth in GNP over two
years. After two years, we hit the fullemployment
ceiling, and growth thereafter
will be limited to the labor force and productivity
factor, possibly between 2 percent
and 4 percent.

Is public finance up to the job of reaching
the goals thus defined in terms of the limits
of our real resources? Possibly, but it requires
breaking new ground. One would
have to begin with increasing government
recycling as rapidly as possible by 8-10 percent
of GNP in order to inaugurate the
1.0-percent growth rate. How rapidly this
could be done would of course depend on
the political and legislative ambience. From
some points of view the fastest and easiest
way to do this is by tax cuts. Unfortunately,
if tax cuts are temporary they tend to be
viewed as windfalls to be saved rather than
spent, so that only part of the tax cuts are
effectively recycled. Alternatively, if not announced
as temporary, tax cuts tend to create
a resistance to later tax increases called
for by full-employment conditions and large
debt-service requirements. This is especially
threatening in the present context of political
campaigning on the basis of promises of
no new taxes. Perhaps the best tax cut would
be a cut in the payroll taxes, as promising
the maximum proportion of recycling, if this