poor or too sick to acquire insurance, and there
must be compulsion for the "free riders" 42 to
pay their share.
There are only two ways to achieve system-
atic universal coverage: a broad-based general
tax with implicit subsidies for the poor and the
sick, or a system of mandates with explicit
subsidies based on income. I prefer the former
because the latter are extremely expensive to
administer and seriously distort incentives;
they result in the near-poor facing marginal tax
rates that would be regarded as confiscatory if
levied on the affluent.43
Both theory and experience show that inte-
grated health care systems are usually the best
way to deliver cost-effective care. The primary
reason is the physician's central role in medi-
cal decision-making. Under any approach to
care, it is the physician who admits patients to
hospitals, orders tests and other procedures,
and decides when to discharge. It is the phy-
sician who prescribes drugs and who refers
patients to other physicians for consultation
and treatment. Thus physicians' decisions
are the major determinant of the cost of care.
Only in an integrated system, however, do
physicians have the incentive, the informa-
tion, and the infrastructure needed to make
these decisions in a cost-effective way. In-
tegrated systems also have an advantage in
avoiding excess capacity of high-cost equip-
ment and personnel.
Given the central importance of physicians
to medical care, I believe the integrated sys-
tems should be led by them and other health
care professionals. At a minimum, health care
professionals should have a prominent place
in the govermance of the systems. One of the
greatest errors of health policy-makers today
is their assumption that market competition or
government regulation are the only instru-
ments available to control health care. There
is room for, indeed need for, a revitalization
of professional norms as a third instrument of
control.' The patient-physician relationship
often is highly personal and intimate, similar
in many ways to relationships within families
or between teachers and pupils or ministers
and congregants. This relationship is, in part,
what economist Kenneth Boulding (1968)
called an integrative system, one that depends
on mutual recognition and acceptance of rights
and responsibilities, enforced by traditional
norms as well as market pressures and govern-
ment regulations. As long as physicians con-
trol the use of complex technology in life and
death situations, and as long as we expect them
to perform priestly functions, they must be en-
dowed with certain privileges and held to cer-
tain standards of behavior different from those
assumed by models of market competition or
government regulation.45
Comprehensive government control of medi-
cal care has not worked well in any setting.
The essence of good care is an informed pa-
tient working cooperatively with a health pro-
fessional who provides personalized attention
and concern. The rules, regulations, and bu-
reaucratic controls that almost always accom-
pany governmental activities are inimical to
high-quality cost-effective care. It is revealing
that countries such as England and Sweden
with deep government involvement in the
financing of medical care have bent over back-
wards to leave physicians with a great deal of
professional autonomy-indeed more auton-
omy than is possessed by many American phy-
sicians working in a "private" system.
Market competition also has its problems. It
assumes a preoccupation with the bottom line
and governance by a corporate mentality that
judges the success of each division by its profit
growth. Physician-led systems will also have