was wasted due to the prevalence of diarrhea
and other conditions that undermined the
body's capacity to utilize nutrients (Fogel and
Floud, 1999).

One implication of these estimates of caloric
availability is that mature adults of the eighteenth
and much of the nineteenth century
must have been very small by current standards
and less physically active. Today the average
American male in his early thirties is
about 177 cm (70 inches) tall and weighs
about 78 kg (172 pounds). Such a male requires
daily about 1,800 kcal for basal metabolism
and a total of 2,300 kcal for baseline
maintenance. If either the British or the French
had been that large during the eighteenth century,
virtually all of the energy produced by
their food supplies would have been required
for personal maintenance, with little available
to sustain work. To have the energy necessary
to produce the national products of these two
countries circa, 1700, the typical adult male
must have been quite short and very light
(Fogel, 1997).

Recent studies have established the predic
tive power of height and weight at early ages
with respect to onset of chronic diseases and
premature mortality at middle and late ages.
Variations in height and weight appear to be
associated with variations in the chemical
composition of the tissues that make uip vital
organs, in the quality of the electrical transmission
across membranes, and in the functioning
of the endocrine system and other vital
systems. Nutnitional status thus appears to be
a critical link connecting improvements in
technology to improvements in human physiology
(Fogel and Costa, 1997).

So far I have focused on the contribution of
technological change to physiol-ogical improvements.
The process has been synergistic,
however, with improvement in. nutrition and
physiology contributi-ng significantly to economic
growth and technological progress in a
manner described elsewhere (Fogel., 2000).
Here I merely want to point out the main conclusion.
Technophysio evolution appears to
account for about half of British economic
growth over the past two centuries. Much of
this gain was due to the improvement in human
thermodynamic efficiency. The rate of
converting human energy input into work output
appears to have increased by about 50 percent
since 1790 (cf., Partha Dasgupta, 1993).
Technophysio evolution calls into question
a number of easy and frequent assu-mptions in
economic analyses such as: tastes are fixed;
needs are fixed or exogenously determined;
existing life tables are adequate to forecast future
pension costs in. 2030 or 2075; and the
rate of aging is genetically controlled and unchanging
from one generation to another.
Technophysio evolution also calls into
question such frequently used theoretical assumptions
as fixed utility functions, fixed rates
of time preference over the life cycle, and the
related assumption that, except for risk differentials,
economic phenoomena should generally
be subject to the same rate of discount.
Yet the rate of discount varies over the life
cycle; children, after all, have much higher
time preferences than adults. It may also vary
by religion. Some individuals are prepared to
wait for their reward in heaven while others
want it here and now. Moreover, these differences
may be evolving and multiplying more
rapidly than is now presunmed, as is indicated
by the debates over the impact of greenhoiuse
gases. Rethinking of the issue is now underway
(see William D. Nordhaus, 1997; cf.,
Peter Koslowski, 1992; Nazli Choucri, 1.993;
Marc Fleurbaey and Philippe Michel, 1994;
Michael Toman, 1994) but the profession can
benefit from an increased allocation of resources
to this problem.

Technophysio evolution requires not just
marginal adjustments, but majtor leaps in economic
theory. We are slow in pondering such
grand questions as the inmplications of the Human
Genome Project, which is now nearing
completion, and the emergence of molecular
medicine for the future of economic life. We
have entered an era in which p-urposeful intervention
in evolutionary processes is passing
beyond plant and animal breeding. The new
growth economics needs to incorporate at least
some aspects of directed, rapid human evolution.
Endogenous technological change needs
to extend to the fundamentals of human behavior.
Theorists also need to grapple with the
ethical implications of technological changes
that, whatever their positive aspects, threaten
to undermine the mystery of human life by
transforming people into "material" that is