the latent characteristics of goods at each location
on the map. Thinking spatially proves especially
useful when there are many more
varieties of goods than attributes that each contains.
Because there are fewer attributes than
goods, the dimensionality of the problem is
greatly reduced and analysis can proceed on
conventional cost-benefit terms.
Examples of applications include hedonic indexes
of quality change needed to correct price
indexes for changing product characteristics;
among such products as automobiles and computers;
regression analysis of housing prices on
house characteristics, used for real estate assessments
in urban economics; the capital asset
pricing model, where asset characteristics are
the means and covariances of their rate of return
distributions; studying how labor markets evaluate
jobs of varying quality, useful for estimating
the social value of safety and environmental
goods that are not directly traded; and how and
why labor markets sustain enormous differences
in rewards and rents among people of
different talents. All are manifestations of almost
exactly the same basic spatial problem:
valuing diversity.
Market values are an important part of the
story. The allocation of diversity in the economy
is another. How are buyers and sellers
matched or assigned to each other in market
equilibrium? These marriage-type questions
bear importantly on the economic consequences
of diversity because stratification of agents is
inherent in spatial equilibrium. Certain kinds of
buyers come to be associated with certain kinds
of sellers, even when there are no externalities
and social influences in preferences. Rich people
tend to ride in a better class of automobiles
than poor people. They are more likely to live
on the lakeshore and in other high-rent districts,
to eat in fancy restaurants, wear designer
clothes, send their children to better schools,
and work in more pleasant environments. But
there are many other manifestations of the same
basic sorting or assignment issues in the presence
of diversity. Widows and orphans tend to
hold their wealth in relatively safe assets. People
from similar ethnic groups tend to live together
in city enclaves, more talented students
are apt to be found in colleges and graduate
schools that have more talented teachers,
higher-quality lawyers work on the largest legal
claims, and people exposed to higher unemployment
risks tend to live in the same
neighborhoods.
The address analogy in spatial equilibrium
often extends to these kinds of matches or assignments:
goods with special attributes appeal
to buyers with specific kinds of tastes. In product
markets, sellers design their goods to cater
to specific types of customers. And in labor
markets, each of us in our career choices and
work activities seeks a niche in the incredibly
complex machinery of modern production and
the division of labor. The number of people
seeking these slots and the nature of the technologies
that affect the personal scale of operations
affects the distribution of rewards in
society.
Markets accommodate diversity by establishing
prices that tend to make different things
relatively close substitutes at the margin. Adam
Smith's insight that market prices tend to equalize
their net advantages is fundamental to these
problems. If one good has more desirable characteristics
than another, the less preferred variety
must compensate for its disadvantages by
selling at a lower price. Supply is inelastic and
exogenous in geographic spatial theory, but in
many applications both sides of the market must
be considered jointly. Sellers choose their varieties
by comparing prices with costs. Higherquality
goods are more costly to produce and
must be offered at a higher price. In equilibrium
these extra costs can only be supported if their
incremental value to some customers is at least
as large as their incremental costs. Thus diversity
creates inequality in prices and values. The
reverse statement is also true. Certain kinds of
inequality are necessary to sustain diverse outcomes.
For example, if higher-quality goods
were not more expensive to produce than lowerquality
ones and if all consumers had the same
relative ranking on the quality of two different
goods, then only the higher-quality good would
survive in the market. The lower-quality good is
driven out by the existence of a superior one
that can be produced at equal cost.
What is less obvious is that there are social
incentives to create inequality, even when
agents are initially identical in every conceivable
way. This is a third theme of the essay. The
basic idea also derives from Smith, who argued
that personal investments in skill acquisition,