LUCAS: MACROECONOMIC PRIORITIES
ful that all of it can be obtained simply by
rearranging the tax structure. It entails a reduction
in government spending as well, which
Prescott interprets as a reduction in the level of
transfer payments, or in the government provision
of goods that most people would buy anyway,
financed by distorting taxes. Think of
elementary schooling or day care. The gains
from eliminating such fiscal "cross-hauling" (as
Sherwin Rosen [1996] called the Swedish daycare
system) involve more than eliminating "excess
burden," but they may well be large.
The stakes in choosing the right monetary
and fiscal policies are high. Sustained inflation,
tax structures that penalize capital accumulation
and work effort, and tax-financed government
provision of private goods all have uncompensated
costs amounting to sizeable fractions of
income. We can see these costs in differences in
economic performance across different countries
and time periods. Even in the United States,
which visibly benefits from the lowest excess
burdens in the modem world, economic analysis
has identified large potential gains from further
improvements in long-run fiscal policy.
II. Gains from Stabilization:
A Baseline Calculation
In the rest of the lecture, I want to apply the
public finance framework just outlined to the
assessment of gains from improved stabilization
policy. Such an exercise presupposes a view of
the workings of the economy in which short-run
monetary and fiscal policies affect resource allocation
in ways that are different from the
supply side effects I have just been discussing.
One possibility is that instability in the quantity
of money or its rate of growth, arising from
government or private sources, induces inefficient
real variability. If that were all there was
to it, the ideal stabilization policy would be to
fix the money growth rate. (Of course, such a
policy would require the Federal Reserve to
take an active role in preventing or offsetting
instabilities in the private banking system.) But
this cannot be all there is to it, because an
economy in which monetary fluctuations induce
real inefficiencies-indeed, any economy in
which money has value-must be one that operates
under missing markets and nominal rigidities
that make changes in money into
something other than mere units changes. Then
it must also be the case that these same rigidities
prevent the economy from responding efficiently
to real shocks, raising the possibility that
a monetary policy that reacts to real shocks in
some way can improve efficiency.
If we had a theory that could let us sort these
issues out, we could use it to work out the
details of an ideal stabilization policy and to
evaluate the effects on welfare of adopting it.
This seems to me an entirely reasonable research
goal-I have been thinking success is
just around the comer for 30 years-but it has
not yet been attained. In lieu of such a theory, I
will try to get quantitative sense of the answer to
the thought-experiment I have posed by studying
a series of simpler thought-experiments.
In the rest of this section, I ask what the effect
on welfare would be if all consumption variability
could be eliminated.4 To this end, consider
a single consumer, endowed with the
stochastic consumption stream
(1) c, = Aete- (l/2)r2e,
where log(se) is a normally distributed random
variable with mean 0 and variance oC2. Under
these assumptions
E(e-(1/2)t02tt) = 1
and mean consumption at t is Ae t. Preferences
over such consumption paths are assumed to be
(2) E{ ;-y},
1 + p 1-y '
where p is a subjective discount rate, y is the
coefficient of risk aversion, and the expectation
is taken with respect to the common distribution
of the shocks so, el ... .
Such a risk-averse consumer would obviously
prefer a deterministic consumption path
to a risky path with the same mean. We quantify
this utility difference by multiplying the risky
path by the constant factor 1 + A in all dates
and states, choosing A so that the household is
4 This calculation replicates the one I carried out in
Lucas (1987, Ch. Il).
VOL. 93 NO. I
3