what is picked from each alternative "menu"
(or opportunity set).'5
However, provided some conditions are
imposed on the "internal consistency" of
the choice function (relating decisions over
one menu in a "consistent" way to decisions
over other-related-menus), it can be
shown that some arbitrariness of power
would still survive.16 But the methodological
critique of James Buchanan would still
apply forcefully, as reformulated in the following
way: why should any restriction
whatever be placed a priori on the choice
function for the society? Why should not
the decisions emerging from agreed social
mechanisms be acceptable without having
to check them against some preconceived
idea of how choices made in different situations
should relate to each other?
What happens, then, to Arrow's impossibility
problem if no restrictions whatever
are placed on the so-called "internal consistency"
of the choice function for the society?
Would the conditions relating individual
preferences to social choice (i.e., the
Pareto principle, nondictatorship, and independence)
then be consistent with each
other? The answer, in fact, is no, not so. If
the Pareto principle and the conditions of
nondictatorship and independence are redefined
to take full note of the fact that
they must relate to social choices, not to any
prior notion of social preference, then a very
similar impossibility reemerges (see Theorem
3 in Sen [1993]).
How does this "general choice-functional
impossibility theorem" work? The underlying
intuition is this. Each of the conditions
relating individual preferences to social decisions
eliminates-either on its own or in
the presence of the other conditions-the
possibility of choosing some alternatives.
And the conjunction of these conditions can
lead to an empty choice set, making it "impossible"
to choose anything.
For example, the Pareto principle is just
such a condition, and the object of this
condition in a choice context, surely, is to
avoid the selection of a Pareto-inferior alternative.
Therefore this condition can be
sensibly redefined to demand that if everyone
prefers x to y, then the social decision
mechanism should be such that y should
not get chosen if x is available.17 Indeed, to
eliminate any possibility that we are implicitly
or indirectly using any intermenu consistency
condition for social choice, we can
define all the conditions for only one given
menu (or opportunity set) S; that is, we can
consider the choice problem exclusively over
a given set of alternative states. The Pareto
principle for that set S then only demands
that if everyone prefers some x to some y
in that set, then y must not be chosen from
that set.
Similarly, nondictatorship would demand
that there be no person such that whenever
she prefers any x to any y in that set S,
then y cannot be chosen from that set.
What about independence? We have to
modify the idea of decisiveness of a group
in this choice context, related to choices
over this given set S. A group would be
decisive for x against y if and only if,
whenever all members of this group prefer
any x to any y in this set S, then y is not to
be chosen from S. Independence would now
demand that any group's power of decisiveness
over a pair (x, y) be completely independent
of individual preferences over pairs
other than (x, y). It can be shown that there
is no way of going from individual preferences
to social choice satisfying these
15The pioneering work on choice-functional formulations
came from Hansson (1968, 1969), Thomas
Schwartz (1972, 1985), Fishburn (1973), and Plott
(1973). Mark Aizerman and his colleagues at the Institute
of Control Sciences in Moscow provided a series
of penetrating investigations of the general choicefunctional
features of moving from individual-choice
functions to social-choice functions (see Aizerman,
1985; Aizerman and Fuad Aleskerov, 1986). On related
matters see also Aizerman and A. V. Malishevski
(1981).
16A sequence of contributions on this and related
issues has come from Plott, Fishburn, Hansson, Donald
Campbell, Bordes, Blair, Kelly, Suzumura, Deb, R. R.
Parks, John Ferejohn, D. M. Grether, Kelsey, V. Denicolo,
and Yasumi Matsumoto, among others. For general
overviews and critiques, see Blair et al. (1976),
Suzumura (1983), and Sen (1986a).
17See also Buchanan and Tullock (1962).