difficulty choosing among plans to fine-tune
their prescription drug coverage, and do not
seem to be informed about or attuned to the
insurance feature of Part D plans.
VII. Conclusions

We conclude from our survey that significant
fractions of the Medicare population, particularly
among those with low SES, bad health,
and low cognitive ability, are poorly informed
about the Part D prescription drug program, and
risk making poor plan choices. Most of the
Medicare population, 89.2 percent, intend to
enroll, although this drops to 80.4 percent among
the poorly informed. When one compares preferences
with alternatives that minimize the expected
present value of out-of-pocket costs, one
finds that 10 percent of the elderly intend to
delay enrollment even though it increases their
expected costs, and 19.4 percent intend to enroll
immediately even though it increases their expected
costs. Choice among plans is erratic, and
shows little attention to or concern about the
insurance features of Part D plans. Procrastination
is a predictable behavioral response to the
complexity and ambiguity surrounding Part D,
making it likely that many who intend to enroll
will miss the May 15, 2006, enrollment deadline.
Consequently, there is likely to be considerable
churning and grumbling in this market in
the future.

How could the Part D market be managed
to overcome consumers' lack of information,
behavioral aversion to market choices, and
procrastination when faced with ambiguous alternatives?
First, CMS should pursue an aggressive
marketing program to find the vulnerable
who are insufficiently informed to act in their
self-interest, sell the neglected and undervalued
benefits of the insurance that Part D offers, and
coax consumers into making sensible plan
choices. This could include giving insurers incentives
to scour for vulnerable seniors. Marketing
of Part D should benefit consumers as
long as it is not done deceptively. Policies that
have proven effective in encouraging early retirement
in downsizing firms may also work in
this market. The most effective is "default in"
rather than "default out"-all individuals are
assigned a plan unless they choose a plan them-
selves or explicitly opt out; see Choi et al.
(2003). This could be done by providing stepby-
step decision forms that require seniors to
choose a plan, opt out, or let Medicare or an
ombudsman make a choice for them; one suggestion
is that these be called Plan D-EZ to
match simplified IRS forms. Another marketing
method that works for retirement is the use of
windows with attractive incentives. This could
be adapted to encourage Part D enrollment by
combining stiff late enrollment penalties with a
program to convert nonenrollees, such as a series
of "last ever" penalty amnesty windows in
the future, particularly for the vulnerable. A
number of private plans are being offered with
quite low premiums and basic coverage, which
encourage enrollment of the healthy. If CMS
ensured that a basic plan, with zero premium, a
limited formulary, and copayments sufficient
for actuarial balance, was always a market option,
then all seniors should enroll in either the
basic or a more comprehensive plan, assuring
affordable medications and catastrophic coverage
for the entire Medicare population.
The new Medicare Part D prescription drug
insurance market illustrates that leaving a large
block of uninformed consumers to "sink or
swim," and relying on their self-interest to
achieve satisfactory outcomes, can be unrealistic.
To make the Part D market work, in the
sense that it provides choices that consumers
want, and achieves the efficiencies it seeks,
CMS will have to make a diligent effort to
manage the market, and to reach all consumers
and provide them with information and assistance
in making wise choices. What the Part D
market, and other market privatization initiatives,
need is a component of Thaler and Sunstein'
s (2003) libertarian paternalism, in which
understanding consumers' limitations, helping
consumers to help themselves, and convincing
them that the market will serve their interests
are intrinsic parts of mechanism design.