is launched, the role of a wage-price
watchdog with teeth would be to see to it
that the adjustment process is a limited
and straightforward one, not a leapfrogging
sequence that will prolong the agony
of adjustment. Again, understanding the
economics of the process is the sine qua
non for shaping the right policy to fit the
particular type and phase of inflation that
is beleaguering us.

Let me return now, before closing, to
several of the abiding problems of endemic
inflation that are engaging the attention
and efforts of economists.
An important but' elusive question for
the policy maker concerns the costs of
inflation. Can the economist tell him
anything useful and definitive on this
subject? Useful, perhaps. Definitive, no.
First, the economist would remind him
that people continually blame inflation for
crimes it does not commit. They are sure
that every increase in their pay envelope
is a reward for merit, every increase in
prices an inflationary theft. Especially
pertinent to our present shock-spiral is
the observation that people "blame inflation
for changes in relative prices and in
real incomes that stem from market forces
that have nothing to do with the course of
the general price level" (Edward Foster).
Second, studies show that in a typical
U.S. inflation, the poor have gained more
in jobs and incomes than they have lost in
higher prices. But in the present inflation,
prices have shifted sharply against the
poor, and any initial gains they may have
made in jobs and income in 1973 have been
more than offset by the losses incurred in
the deepening 1974-75 recession induced
to fight inflation.

Third, at the rates of inflation experienced
prior to the 1973-75 explosion, most
economists find it difficult to believe that
the costs of inflation-mostly in redistributional
effects, but with some distortion
in resource allocation-hold a candle
to the welfare losses of substantial add-ons
to unemployment. Fourth, however, when
inflation reaches double-digit levels, the
costs in terms of the social conflicts and
tensions it generates and the uncertainties
and loss of confidence in the dollar yardstick
it may breed are important intangibles
that economists cannot ignore, yet
have not been able to quantify. We need
to understand far more about what unsettles
and upsets people about inflation,
how this affects their economic behavior,
and what economic costs result. Clearly,
in an economy where inflation is endemic,
the balance between its gains and losses
deserves intensive further study.
Another important question is this:
How much of the present run-up in prices
of foodstuffs, oil, and raw materials is a
transitory phenomenon, how much is a
one-time shift to a new plateau, and how
much represents a new upward trend?
Economists have trained the guns of price
theory and price elasticity estimation on
these questions in the case of oil and several
other basic materials. They generally
come up with more optimistic answers
for five to ten years hence than for the
near-term. But much of the answer lies
in geo-political, meteorological, and similar
puzzles-for example, the effectiveness
of oil and other raw material cartels,
the pace of world population increases
and income growth, and the possibility of
a dry, cold phase in world weather-that
lie largely or wholly beyond the reach of
economic analysis.

What we do know is this: The 1950's
and the 1960's were a period of gently declining
or roughly stable world prices for
raw materials or foodstuffs. Now, rising
population, industrialization, income, and
aspirations may put such pressure on the
world's supply capabilities that while we
are not nearing any Club-of-Rome ultimate
limits, we may for some time exceed
the speed limits of stable expansion. If so