no charitable giving would be lost43 and
much revenue would be gained or reductions
in tax rates would be possible if the federal
deduction for property taxes were disallowed
and the deduction for charitable contribu-
tions were restricted to amounts in excess of
two percent of income. In addition, the tax-
exemption for interest on newly issued state
and local bonds should be removed.
Although income tax compliance is better
in the United States than in most other
countries, roughly 15 percent of individual
income is still unreported, according to IRS
estimates.44 Extension of withholding to in-
terest and dividends would improve compli-
ance. Congress enacted a withholding system
for these income items in 1982, but repealed
it the following year under pressure from the
financial institutions. Since information re-
turns are required for annual interest and
dividend payments of $10 or more, the
marginal costs of compliance with a with-
holding system would be small.
One of the major features of the 1986 tax
law was to telescope the schedule of tax rates
into two acknowledged and two concealed
brackets, a bizarre four-bracket rate struc-
ture of 15, 28, 33, and 28 percent. The reduc-
tion in the number of brackets was a re-
sponse to the flat tax proposals that were
being promoted when the tax reform bill
began its journey through Congress, while
the unsightly bulge in the rate schedule was
motivated by revenue considerations. It is
not necessary to return to 14 brackets, but
there is room for more rate graduation with-
out the bulge.
In this connection, consideration needs to
be given to improving the structure of estate
and gift taxes to compensate for their low
average rates. These taxes were almost gut-
ted by increases in the exemptions and re-
ductions in the tax rates when income tax
rates were cut in 1981. Now that the top  income tax rates are even lower, it is time to
rely more heavily on the estate and gift
taxes.
The reduction in the tax rates led to two
additional changes in the 1986 act that I
believe were unfortunate. Congress elimi-
nated the deduction for two-earner couples
and ended the privilege of averaging income
for tax purposes.45 Both provisions should
be restored in the interest of horizontal eq-
uity.
Finally, contrary to the prevailing view
among public finance experts, Congress
clearly believes that a separate, unintegrated
corporate tax is essential for effective income
taxation. A separate tax prevents individuals
from avoiding the income tax by accumulat-
ing earnings at the corporate level, although
some might question whether corporations
should be taxed at a higher rate than the top
bracket individual rate. But in its present
form, the corporate tax encourages debt fi-
nancing. It is alleged to be a major cause of
the recent upsurge in leveraged buyouts and
mergers. The remedy is not to allow a deduc-
tion or credit for dividends received at the
individual level. Rather, the deduction of
interest by corporations should be denied
while reducing their tax rate to the neighbor-
hood of 15 percent to maintain the revenues
now produced by the corporate tax.46 The
corporate tax would become a low-rate tax
on net corporate income before distribu-
tions.
Tax Rates and Progressivity. The reforms I
have suggested would greatly increase the
income tax base and permit a realignment of
the tax rates to achieve the distributional
objectives described earlier. At calendar year
1990 levels, the tax base would increase from
$2.4 trillion to $2.8 trillion (Table 6). The
increase in the base leaves enough room to
cut rates in the lowest taxable income brack-
ets and still keep the top tax rates at reason-
ably modest levels.