horizontal equity; where income tax rates
had been pushed to very high levels, they are
being moderated. Curiously, the world appears
to be moving toward a consensus on
the Simons' view that the income tax should
be levied on a broad base with graduated
rates reaching a maximum of 50 percent or
less, though not for his reasons.
Economic Incentives. The effects of the
progressive income tax on incentives to work
and to save are hard to measure. As is well
known, the substitution and income effects
of taxation work against each other, and the
net result cannot be predicted.
Sample surveys have revealed that professional
personnel do not vary their hours of
work in response to high tax rates."9 However,
recent econometric studies suggest that
the pre-1986 income and payroll taxes reduced
the work effort of primary earners in
the United States by about 8 percent, while
secondary earners-who have a greater opportunity
to vary their labor input-reduced
their work effort by as much as 30 percent.20
According to this approach, the 1986 reform
may have increased labor supply of married
men by only 1 percent and of married women
by less than 3 percent, largely because the
marginal tax rates of most workers were not
reduced very much.2" Burtless estimates that
the Reagan tax and transfer policies increased
average annual taxes of men aged
25-54 by no more than 2-4 percent and of
women in the same age group by no more
than 3.5 percent.22
Historical trends in U.S. labor supply are
not consistent with the finding that taxes
have reduced work effort. Adult males have
been reducing their labor supply over the
last forty years, largely through earlier retirement
little of which is the effect of tax rates.
The labor force participation of women has
risen sharply in recent years, despite high
marginal rates resulting from the requirement
that married couples must file joint
returns to benefit from income splitting.
Studies in other countries are not reliable
enough to support conclusions about the relationship
between taxes and labor supply.
The effect of taxes on saving is even more
ambiguous. A few studies claim that they
have found a significant response to an increase
in the real after-tax return on saving;
others find that the response, if any, is close
to zero.23 The reduction in the personal saving
rate in the United States in the 1980s
confounded most economists in view of the
reductions in the marginal tax rates, the incentive
provided by individual retirement accounts
(IRAs), and the high real interest
rates, all of which should have increased the
incentive to save.
The strongest conclusion one can draw
from the available evidence is that the incentive
effects of taxation have been relatively
small. Yet the supply siders were convinced
that the incentive effects were so large that
rate cuts would increase revenues when tax
rates- are reduced.24 U.S. tax rates were cut
sharply in 1981 and 1986, but these cuts had
little effect on labor supply and no effect on
saving. Under the circumstances, so long as
tax rates are not pushed to punitive levels,
incentive considerations do not justify neglect
of the distributional objective of tax
policy.
Income vs. Expenditure Tax. The revival
of interest in the expenditure tax can be
traced to the difficulties of taxing income
from capital under the income tax. However,
economists and tax lawyers have also found  19See Break (1957) and Holland (1969).
20These estimates are based on a comparison with
work effort under a system of lump-sum taxes. The
estimates would be reduced substantially if the basis of
comparison were a proportional income tax. For summaries
of recent studies and their implications for policy,
see Bosworth (1984), ch. 5 and Gary Burtless and
Robert Haveman (1987). The methodology of these
studies is explained by Hausman (1987).  21See Hausman and Poterba (1987).  22See Burtless (1989).
23' ,3.For a review of the various studies, see Evans
(1983) and Bosworth (1984), chaps. 3 and 5.
24 President Ronald Reagan was one of those who
belieed that tax rate cuts would actually increase revenues
(see Reagan, 1981, p. 710). The supply-side view
is defended in Raboy (1982). For an analysis of this
view, see Meyer (1981).