the back of everyman's hand.
Second, a related cross to bear can be
characterized by Kermit Gordon's apt
phrase, "virtue is so much easier when
duty and self-interest coincide." Not only
does that foredoom action on many microeconomic
fronts, as already noted, but it
puts roadblocks in the path of efforts to
make fiscal policy a two-way street. For
forty years, Congress has enacted major
tax increases only under the whiplash of
war. The resulting reliance on tight money
to fight peacetime excess demand, coupled
with expansionary fiscal policy to fight
recession and slack, have had an unmistakeable
ratchet effect that has tilted the
system toward tighter money and easier
budgets. (Small wonder, by the way, that
many economists and policy makers are
unwilling to give up, via indexing, the
increases in effective income tax rates
"legislated" by inflation.)
Third, the public sees economists as the
bearers of hard and unpalatable truths.
And often we are, by the very nature of
our sometimes dismal discipline. Except
when idle resources can be put to work or
productivity increased, our message is the
stern one of tradeoffs, benefits at a cost,
and no one-dimensional daydreaming.
Even worse, at times economics has to
bring the bad tidings that for some problems
there are no satisfactory solutions.
For some thirty years, we have warned
that full employment, price stability, and
full freedom of economic choice cannot coexist
in a world of strongly organized producer
groups. More recently, economic
analysis has brought home the unromantic
truth that failure to cure some of our social
ills traces less to a failure of will, or "rightwing
villains," or a calloused "establishment,
" or powerlessness of the people,
than it does to the prosaic facts that the
problems are tough and complex and the
goals we seek may be irreconcilable-in
short, trace more to conflicts in our national
objectives than to conflicts among
social groups. Welfare reform is a case in
point: no solution can simultaneously provide
a decent minimum income for all,
preserve work incentives, cut no one's
benefits, and avoid huge budget costs (see
Schultze (1972); Rivlin (1973)). We may
view such work as a contribution to
straight thinking and rational choice. Our
critics are more likely to view it, at worst,
as a counsel of defeat (which it is not) or
at best a counsel of inescapable compromise
(which it is).
Since the foregoing misperceptions and
roadblocks thwart the translation of
good economics into good policy, one could
justify, in cold cost-benefit terms, a sizeable
investment to overcome or reduce
them. The most obvious implication is
that the country needs to invest more in
formal economic education at all levels.
But an equally pressing need is for economists
to invest more of their time and
effort in making themselves understood
to the public and policy maker-and that
in turn requires recognition of this skill
in the academic reward system. This
might serve as a useful antidote to the
influence of mathematics and econometrics
which, while heightening the precision of
professional thinking and internal communication,
have apparently dulled the
appetite and eroded the facility to communicate
with the public in intelligible
English prose.
In a very real sense, this confronts the
press with an unusual opportunity and
challenge, perhaps even a responsibility,
to serve as a translator and interpreter of
economics and its offerings. But believing
(probably rightly) that their readers and
listeners prefer to hear of fights and
failures, crises and controversies, rather
than of quiet contributions and consensus,
the conventional or electronic press is not
very likely to rise to this challenge. So it is
still up to economists. But I must not