eliminating premium differentials. Or, it may
reflect a reluctance to choose between conflict-
ing values.
Before leaving the survey it is worth con-
sidering what it reveals about the ability of
health economists to disseminate their conclu-
sions about the positive questions to a wider
audience. Overall, one must conclude that they
have not been very successful, as revealed by
the political debate of 1993- 1994 and the me-
dia coverage of policy issues. Consider, for
example, question 19 concerning whether in
the long run employers bear the primary bur-
den of their contributions to their employees'
health insurance. Although 87 percent of the
health economists disagreed with that state-
ment, politicians on both sides of the debate
assumed, erroneously, that it was correct.
Moreover, nearly all of the media made the
same error. Most of the politicians and most
of the media also showed little understanding
of questions 4, 12, 13, and 18.
I am as ready as the next economist to
criticize politicians and journalists, but the
survey results suggest that their poor under-
standing of health economics is not entirely
their fault. First, the economic theorists
and the practicing physicians, two groups with
above-average ability and opportunity to ab-
sorb the conclusions of the health economists,
did not show good command of the positive
questions. In my judgment the health econo-
mists answered 80 percent correctly, but the
average theorist answered only 52 percent cor-
rectly and the mean score for the physicians
was only 53 percent. The differences in the
distributions of scores is striking: 45 of the
46 health economists had more correct an-
swers than the average theorist or the average
physician.
A second possible reason for the poor un-
derstanding of health economics displayed by
the politicians and the media in 1993-1994 is
the wide disagreement among health econo-
mists over the policy-value questions. When
health economists interact with politicians and
journalists, their discussions probably focus on
the policy-value questions; in the absence of a
professional consensus on many of these ques-
tions, it is not surprising that politicians and
journalists fall back on their own values to
shape their positions.
Returning to the question posed at the be-
ginning of this section about why economic
research failed to result in a more informed
and productive health care policy debate, the
survey results provide some provisional an-
swers. First, although health economists are
in substantial agreement about the positive
questions, they have major disagreements
about policy-value questions. Second, health
economists were not successful in getting
their conclusions on positive questions ac-
cepted by the politicians or the media, and
even had difficulty in communicating their
results to economic theorists and practicing
physicians. Third, the health economists'
disagreements over policy probably reflect
differences in values, although it is clear that
there are many positive questions embedded
in the policy-value questions. In my judg-
ment the problem is not so much that the
health economists disagree about the embed-
ded questions as that they are uncertain
about them. In the face of such uncertainty,
they tend to let their values drive their policy
recommendations.
III. The Future
If values play such an important role in pol-
icy disputes, what are the implications for
economics and economists? First, we should
endeavor to make explicit the differences in
values, and seek ways to resolve them. Value
differences can take many different forms.
Economists are most familiar with the distinc-
tion between efficiency and distributional is-
sues, especially greater equality of income
versus greater total income.40 But comprehen-
sive changes in health policy can have other
important distributional effects. Even for in-
dividuals at the same income level, the costs
and the benefits of care could change along
many dimensions: rural areas versus central
cities, the elderly versus the young, smokers
versus nonsmokers, savers versus nonsavers,
men versus women, and so on. Health econ-
omists who are unanimous in approving gains
in efficiency might have very different views