Longer durations of unemployment are not
the only adverse effect of UI benefits. The practice
of temporary layoffs in which unemployed
individuals have a spell of unemployment but
return to their original employer is substantially
encouraged by high UI replacement rates (Feldstein,
1976, 1978a). High benefits also encourage
individuals to accept work in firms with
high seasonal or cyclical layoffs. That reduces
the wage that such firms have to pay and thus
subsidizes the expansion of those high unemployment
industries.
As all of this became clear, the most obvious
first reform was to include unemployment benefits
in taxable income. Although there was
initially strong opposition to this idea, it was
hard to argue with the position that cash income
is cash income and should be taxed. The notion
that taxing unemployment insurance would inappropriately
burden the poor was clearly contrary
to the fact that the income tax allows a
substantial exclusion of income before any tax
is levied. A poor UI recipient would pay no tax.
The initial legislative compromise was to include
only half of UI benefits in taxable income
and to do so only for relatively high-income taxpayers.
This provided a natural experiment that
Gary Solon (1985) used to show that the relative
duration of unemployment fell for those whose
benefits were taxed. Later, in the Tax Reform Act
of 1986, the UI benefits were fully subject to the
income tax like all other forms of labor income.
Taxing UI benefits eliminated the possibility
that an individual could have a higher net income
from UI benefits than by working. It is
hard to know what the aggregate effect on unemployment
has been, but my personal estimate
is that the unemployment rate probably fell by
about one-half percentage point after benefits
were taxed, an effect equal to more than
500,000 jobs at any time.
The evidence that UI benefits cause substantial
distortion led to analytic studies of the level
of benefits that optimally balances distortion
and protection. Martin Bailey (1978) presented
an analytic model in which the optimal level of
benefits depends on the individual's coefficient
of relative risk aversion and on the elasticity of
the duration of unemployment with respect to
the UI benefit replacement ratio. John Gruber
(1997) used this framework to derive an explicit
optimal UI benefit based on data on the effect of
unemployment on household food consump-  tion, concluding that the optimal replacement
rate should be much less than the 50 percent in
current law. More recently, however, Raj
Chetty (2003) showed that the measure of risk
aversion that is relevant to designing the optimal
UI benefit may be substantially greater than
the risk aversion that is relevant to financial
investments, because many types of household
spending cannot be adjusted in the short-run,
which is relevant to unemployment spells. Chetty'
s analysis points to optimal UI replacement
rates that are close to the levels that we observe
in the United States.
These calculations of optimal UI benefits assume
that individuals have no financial assets.
In contrast, if individuals save optimally, the
optimal value of UI benefits--especially for
short and moderate spells would be very much
less. Although there is evidence that individuals
who face greater income uncertainty have
somewhat higher saving rates, it would be
wrong to assume that in the absence of unemployment
insurance everyone would save
enough to finance consumption optimally during
spells of unemployment. Some individuals
would be too short-sighted to save for potential
unemployment.
What is the optimal response to this problem?
One possibility would be to continue the current
system of paying UI benefits but with the level
and time path of benefits selected to balance the
gain from protection and the loss from distortion.
Another possibility would be to shift to a meanstested
program, although that would induce some
individuals to game the system, saving nothing so
that they could qualify for means-tested benefits
when they became unemployed. The same problem
of asymmetric information would prevail, as
in the case of Social Security retirement benefits
that I discussed before: the government could not
distinguish individuals who were too short-sighted
to save from those who were gaming the system.
On efficiency grounds, the choice between the
current system and government means-tested benefits
would depend on the response of unemployment
to the benefit level and on the relative
number of those who would save optimally, those
too shortsighted to save, and those who would
choose not to save in order to qualify for the  means-tested benefits.
A third possibility is to require everyone to
have an unemployment insurance savings account
earmarked to pay benefits if unemployment