problem. Meanwhile it leaves a whole
galaxy of other urgent economic issues
largely untouched.
It is now the considered sense of the
community, even of economists when un-
hampered by professional doctrine, that
the most prominent areas of market
oligopoly-automobiles, rubber, chemi-
cals, plastics, alcohol, tobacco, detergents,
cosmetics, computers, bogus health rem-
edies, space adventure-are areas not of
low but of high development, not of in-
adequate but of excessive resource use.
And there is a powerful instinct that in
some areas of monopoly or oligopoly,
most notably in the production of weapons
and weapons systems, resource use is dan-
gerously vast.
In further contradiction of the estab-
lished microeconomic conclusions, we have
an increasing reaction by the community
to deficient resource use in industries that,
at least in the scale and structure of the
firm, approach the market model. Housing,
health services, and local transportation
are among the leading cases. The depriva-
tion and social distress that follow from
the poor performance of these industries
are also something that, in their nondoctri-
nal manifestation, most economists take
for granted.
The defender of the established doctrine
does, of course, argue that excess and
deprivation in resource use in the areas
just mentioned reflect consumer choice.
And in the areas of deprivation he can
rightly insist that the fault lies with firms
that, though small, are local monopolies
or reflect the monopoly power of unions.
These explanations beg two remarkably
obvious questions: Why does the modern
consumer increasingly tend to insanity,
increasingly insist on self-abuse? And why
do little monopolies perform badly and the
big ones too well?
In fact the neoclassical model has no
explanation of the most important micro-
economic problem of our time. That prob-
lem is why we have a highly unequal
development as between industries of
great market power and industries of
slight market power, with the develop-
ment, in defiance of all doctrine, greatly
favoring the first.1
The macroeconomic failure has been, if
anything, more embarrassing. Save in its
strictly mystical manifestation in one
branch of monetary theory, modern macro-
economic policy depends for its validity
and workability on the neoclassical mar-
ket. That market, whether competitive,
monopolistic, or oligopolistic, is the ulti-
mate and authoritative instruction to the
profit-maximizing firm. When output and
employment are deficient, policy requires
that aggregate demand be increased; this
is an instruction to the market to which
firms in turn respond. When the economy
is at or near the effective capacity of the
plant and the labor force and inflation is
the relevant social discomfort, the remedy
is reversed. Demand is curtailed; the result
is either an initial effect on prices or a
delayed one as surplus labor seeks em-
ployment, interest rates fall and lower
factor costs bring stable or lower prices.
Such is the accepted basis of policy. It
follows faithfully from the neoclassical
faith in the market. The practical con-
sequences of pursuing it need no elucida-
tion. It has been tried in recent years in
every developed country. The common
result has been politically unacceptable
unemployment, persistent and (in my
view) socially damaging inflation or, more
often, a combination of the two. The ex-
treme failure has been, not surprisingly,
in the most advanced industrial country,