The resurgence of the American economy
since 1995 has outrun all but the most optimistic
expectations. Economic forecasting models
have been seriously off track and growth projections
have been revised to reflect a more
sanguine outlook only recently.! It is not surprising
that the unusual combination of more
rapid growth and slower inflation in the 1990's
has touched off a strenuous debate among economists
about whether improvements in America'
s economic performance can be sustained.
The starting point for the economic debate is
the thesis that the 1990's are a mirror image of
the 1970's, when an unfavorable series of "supply
shocks" led to stagflation-slower growth
and higher inflation.2 In this view, the development
of information technology (IT) is one of a
series of positive, but temporary, shocks. The
competing perspective is that IT has produced a
fundamental change in the U.S. economy, leading
to a permanent improvement in growth
prospects.
The relentless decline in the prices of information
technology equipment has steadily enhanced
the role of IT investment as a source of American
economic growth. Productivity growth in ITproducing
industries has gradually risen in importance
and a productivity revival is now under way
in the rest of the economy. Despite differences in
methodology and data sources, a consensus is
building that the remarkable behavior of IT prices
provides the key to the surge in economic growth.
In the following section I show that the foundation
for the American growth resurgence is
the development and deployment of semiconductors.
The decline in IT prices is rooted in
developments in semiconductor technology that
are widely understood by technologists and
economists. This technology has found its
broadest applications in computing and communications
equipment, but has reduced the cost of
a wide variety of other products.
A substantial acceleration in the IT price decline
occurred in 1995, triggered by a much
sharper acceleration in the price decline of
semiconductors in 1994. Although the decline
in semiconductor prices has been projected to
continue for at least another decade, the recent
acceleration could be temporary. This can be
traced to a shift in the product cycle for semiconductors
from three years to two years that
took place in 1995 as the consequence of intensifying
competition in markets for semiconductor
products.
In Section II I outline a framework for analyzing
the role of information technology in the
American growth resurgence. Constant quality
price indexes separate the change in the performance
of IT equipment from the change in price
for a given level of performance. Accurate and
timely computer prices have been part of the
U.S. National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA) since 1985. Unfortunately, important
information gaps remain, especially on trends in
prices for closely related investments, such as
software and communications equipment.
The cost of capital is an essential concept for
capturing the economic impact of information
technology prices. Swiftly falling prices provide
powerful economic incentives for the substitution
of IT equipment for other forms of capital and for
labor services. The rate of the IT price decline is a