frequently emerge that pressure children,
parents, spouses, and other relatives into
helping out family members in need. In addition,
family members use their frequent
interaction with one another to raise the
level of guilt experienced by a member when
he or she does not help out.
The formal analysis of the interaction
among overlapping generations began with
Paul A. Samuelson's brilliant paper in 1958.
This spawned an enormous literature that
continues up to the present. Although
Samuelson had relevant obiter dicta about
social compacts, altruism, and family obligations,
his model and that of most of the
subsequent literature assumes that each person
enters the analysis as a young adult
without personal connections to older cohorts.
A long review of overlapping generation
models in the recent New Palgrave Dictionary
(see John Geanakoplos, 1987) has no
discussion whatsoever of familial relations
between members of overlapping generations.
I claim that the neglect of childhood
and of the intimate relations among parents,
children, husbands-wives, and other family
members misled these studies sometimes into
focusing on minor problems and diverted
attention away from some important consequences
of the overlapping of generations
(the discussion in the next few paragraphs
draws partly on Becker and Murphy, 1988).
One example of the emphasis on unimportant
problems is the concern with the
plight of older people when there are few
durable assets that can finance consumption
at old age. In an influentual literature on the
demand for money, the social role of money
is even attributed to a durability that
enables older people to finance consumption
by selling to the next generation money
accumulated when young (see, for example,
Thomas Sargent, 1987, ch. 7, and Neil
Wallace, 1980). Yet when anthropologists
study simple societies that do not have money
or other durable assets, they find that old
people finance their consumption mainly
by relying for support on children and
other kin. Indeed, children have been an
important resource and money balances an
unimportant resource of the elderly in practically
all societies, whether simple or complicated.


General equilibrium theorists are concerned
about the continuum of equilibria,
inefficiency, and other problems that arise in
models where overlapping-generations persist
indefinitely into the future (see, for example,
Geanakoplos, 1987, or Timothy J.
Kehoe, 1987). Although these problems
would not completely disappear, I conjecture
that they would be much less important
if overlapping-generations models incorporated
the informal trades and assistance
available to parents, children, and other
members of the same family.
Ever since Plato's Republic, philosophers
have worried about whether parents invest
sufficiently in the health, skills, and morals
of their children. Overlapping-generations
models usually neglect childhood and concentrate
on savings by young adults and
their trades with old adults. The treatment of
children by parents not only is so important
in its own right, but it also greatly influences
the relations between older and younger
adults (Allan Drazen, 1978, is one of the few
earlier studies that recognizes the importance
of investments in children for overlapping-
generations models.)

I cannot do more on this occasion than
present the bare bones of an analysis of how
families respond to the demands of both old
age and childhood. The analysis is straightforward
when altruistic parents leave bequests
to their children. The combination of
altruism and bequests eliminates any difficulties
in financing the wealth-maximizing
investment in children's health, training, and
other human capital. For if the marginal rate
of return on additional human capital exceeds
the rate on assets, both parents and
children would be better off with additional
capital. Parents can save less to offset the
negative effect on their consumption of
greater spending on their children's human
capital, and they can reduce bequests to
offset the effect of lower savings on consumption
at old age.

Bequests also partly insulate parents from
many risks of old age. The opportunity to
draw on bequests provides an annuity-like