Tradable permits have been proposed as
an alternative to the tax. There are two
main possibilities: (i) estimating "reasonable"
emissions country by country and establishing
commensurate quotas or (ii) distributing
tradable rights in accordance with
some "equitable" criterion, such as equal
emissions per capita (a possibility that has
actually been discussed). Depending on how
restrictive the aggregate of such tradable
emission rights might be, the latter is tantamount
to distributing trillions of dollars in
discounted value and making, for a country
like Nigeria, the outcome of its population
census the country's major economic policy.
If, instead, quotas are negotiated to correspond
to every country's currently "reasonable"
emissions level, they will surely be
renegotiated every 5 or 10 years, and selling
an emissions right will be perceived as evidence
that a quota was initially too generous.
It is unlikely that governments will engage
in trades that acknowledge excessive
initial quotas.

I do not foresee negotiated national quotas
subject to serious enforcement, especially
enforcement through financial penalties.
I think any international regime for
carbon abatement can seriously include only
the developed countries, and I exclude from
this category the countries that we used to
call the Eastern Bloc. I can easily imagine
institutional arrangements that are universalist,
some kind of "framework agreement"
to which every country subscribes, with specific
commitments to be negotiated later.
But I expect serious commitments to be
undertaken only by the countries that can
afford to, and I am undecided whether an
institutional pretense of a universalist system
has advantages or, instead, the developed
world should proceed independently
and unencumbered with the need for a universalist
facade.

The model that I find most helpful in
conceptualizing a greenhouse regime among
the richer countries is the negotiations
among the countries of Western Europe for
distributing Marshall Plan dollars among
themselves and the negotiations, beginning
in 1951, on "burden sharing" in NATO.
There was never a formula for distributing
Marshall Plan dollars; there was never an
explicit criterion, such as equalizing living
standards, equalizing growth rates, maximizing
aggregate output or growth, or establishing
a floor under levels of living. Baseline
dollar-balance-of-payments deficits were a
point of departure, but the negotiations took
into account investment needs, traditional
consumption levels, war-induced capital
needs, opportunities for import substitution
and export promotion, and opportunities to
substitute intra-European trade for trade
with hard-currency countries.
The United States insisted that the recipients
argue out and agree on shares. In the
end, they did not quite make it, the United
States having to make the final allocation.
But all the submission of data and open
argument led, if not to consensus, to a reasonable
appreciation of each nation's needs.
The negotiations were professional; they
were assisted by a proficient secretariat. The
resources involved for most recipient countries
were immensely important. Good relations
were observed throughout; and proficiency
in debate, acceptance of criteria, and
negotiating etiquette steadily improved.
That is the only model I find plausible,
and I believe distribution of Marshall Plan
and defense-support funds to Europe is the
only model of multilateral negotiation involving
resources commensurate with the
cost of greenhouse abatement. (In the first
year, Marshall Plan funds were about 1.5
percent of U.S. GNP and-adjusting for
overvalued currencies-probably 5 percent
of OEEC GNP).

What that model suggests is that the main
participating countries in a greenhouseabatement
regime would submit for each
other's scrutiny and cross-examination plans
for reducing carbon emissions. The plans
would be accompanied by estimates of
emissions or emissions reduction from some
projected level, but any commitments undertaken
would be to the policies, not the
emissions. And not all of the plans would
necessarily be commitments.
The United States, for instance, could
present a plan for the introduction of a new
generation of nuclear power reactors beginning
sometime in the next century, but it is