pened to such investments recently (Eileen I.
Collins, 1990).
V. Data Woes
Why are the data not better? The facts
themselves are not in dispute. Every decade
or so a prestigious commission or commit-
tee produces a report describing in detail
various data difficulties and lacunae: the
Stigler committee report on government
price statistics (National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, 1961) is still a living docu-
ment, as are the related Ruggles report
(Richard Ruggles, 1977), the Rees produc-
tivity report (National Academy of Sciences,
1979), the Bonnen report (J. T. Bonnen,
1981), the Creamer GNP improvement re-
port (D. Creamer, 1977), the recent OTA
report (Office of Technology Assessment,
1989), and many others. But life goes on,
and change in this area is very slow. Why? I
don't really have good answers to this ques-
tion, and the topic itself is much larger than
can be handled in this address, but at least
three observations come to mind:
(i) The measurement problems are really
hard.
(ii) Economists have little clout in Wash-
ington, especially as far as data-collec-
tion activities are concerned. More-
over, the governmental agencies in
these areas are balkanized and under-
funded.
(iii) We ourselves do not put enough em-
phasis on the value of data and data
collection in our training of graduate
students and in the reward structure of
our profession. It is the preparation
skill of the econometric chef that
catches the professional eye, not the
quality of the raw materials in the meal,
or the effort that went into procuring
them (Griliches, 1986b).
In many cases the desired data are un-
available because their measurement is re-
ally difficult. After decades of discussion we
are not even close to a professional agree-
ment on how to define and measure the
output of banking, insutrance, or the stock
market (see Griliches, 1992). Similar diffi-
culties arise in conceptualizing the output
of health services, lawyers, and other con-
sultants, or the capital stock of R&D. While
the tasks are difficult, progress has been
made on such topics. The work of Jorgen-
son and Barbara Fraumeni (1992) on the
measurement of educational output is an
example both of what can be done and of
the difficulties that still remain. But it is not
reasonable for us to expect the government
to produce statistics in areas where the con-
cepts are mushy and where there is little
professional agreement on what is to be
measured and how. Much more could be
done, however, in an exploratory and re-
search mode.16 Unfortunately, the various
statistical agencies have been both starved
for funds and badly led, with the existing
bureaucratic structure downplaying the re-
search components of their enterprise when
not being outright hostile to them, research
being cut first when a budget crunch hap-
pens (Triplett, 1991).
Our current statistical structure is badly
split, there is no central direction, and the
funding is heavily politicized. How else can
one explain that the national income ac-
counts and the BEA as a whole receive only
one-third, and health and education statis-
tics each less than one-half of the funds
allocated to agricultural statistics?17 How
does one explain the failure of the most