bad, and row 3b in Table 1 indicates no
decline in the R&D coefficient even without
the computer industry.
What is one to make of these conflicting
stories? It seems that the observed decline
in the R&D coefficients did not begin seri-
ously until the latter half of the 1970's, with
the second oil-price shock and the rise in
the dollar exchange rate. The abruptness of
the decline argues against a "supply-side"
explanation in terms of exhaustion of inven-
tive opportunities. It is more likely that the
peculiar aggregate shocks of that time went
against R&D-intensive industries: first, be-
cause they hit energy-intensive industries
such as chemicals and petroleum refining
more severely; and second, because the sub-
sequent rise in value of the dollar and the
expansion in imports that followed hit some
of the more high-tech R&D-intensive indus-
tries even harder, leading to declines in
"competitiveness," losses of rents, and the
appearance of excess capacity. The subse-
quent rise in the R&D coefficients (if it did
in fact occur), the rise in corporate R&D
investments through most of the 1980's, and
the rise in patenting in, the late 1980's (as
we shall see), all argue against interpreting
these coefficient movements as reflecting
"real" declines in the once and future
"potency" of R&D. What did happen,
though, was a sharp widening of the differ-
ential between social and private returns to
R&D. The internationalization of R&D, the
rise in the technical and entrepreneurial
skills of our competitors, and the sharp rise
in the dollar exchange rate in the mid-1980's,
all combined to erode, rather rapidly, the
rents accruing to the earlier accumulated
R&D capital and to the technical-expertise
positions of many of our enterprises. This
rise in the rate of private obsolescence and
the fall in the "appropriability" of R&D led
to sharp declines in both profitability and
real product prices. The latter, if they were
actually reflected in the appropriate price
indexes, would show up as an increase in
productivity, rather than a decline.
Before accepting this inconclusive verdict,
one still has to face the evidence of declin-
ing patent-to-R&D ratios. Figure 4 plots
domestic patent applications divided by to-
tal company-financed R&D expenditures in
U.S. industry (in 1972 dollars) and by the
total number of scientists and engineers in
industry. Looking at the right half of this