in their own self interest. But I also believe that
there is a role for government that justifies the
provision of social insurance benefits. I come to
this conclusion on utilitarian grounds rather
than from any philosophical commitment to social
solidarity.

There are two distinct reasons for providing
social insurance. Both reflect the asymmetry of
information. The first is that asymmetric information
weakens the functioning of private insurance
markets. The second is the inability of
the government to distinguish between those
who are poor in old age or when unemployed
because of bad luck or an irrational lack of
foresight from those who are intentionally
"gaming" the system by not saving in order to
receive transfer payments. Both problems show
that the case for social insurance cannot be rejected
simply by arguing that such programs force
people to act against their own best interests.
But these problems of asymmetric information
or any other market failures do not necessarily
justify government action. While a
perfect and benevolent government would be
better than a private market burdened by market
imperfections, actual governments are neither
perfect nor necessarily benevolent. Political actors
do not maximize a social welfare function,
but reflect political pressures and bureaucratic
preferences. Moreover, social insurance programs
impose costs that must be weighed
against the benefits of overcoming market imperfections.
Both require empirical evaluation.
Consider first the asymmetry of information
in insurance markets. To be specific, consider
the case of private annuities. If individuals can
buy annuities on actuarially fair terms they may
increase their expected utility by annuitizing
their assets at retirement. But if individuals differ
in their life expectancy and know more
about their mortality prospects than the insurance
company can learn, those with shorter life
expectancy will want to annuitize a smaller
portion of their wealth. Insurance companies
will recognize the resulting self-selection and
offer annuities with premiums that reflect the
mortality rates of the long-lived individuals
who are their most likely customers. This produces
a downward spiral in the demand for
annuities that is limited only when, at some
point, the risk-reducing value of annuitizing
outweighs the less than actuarially fair pricing
of individual annuities.

A mandatory social insurance program like traditional
Social Security circumvents this asymmetry
of information by providing everyone with a
retirement annuity rather than a lump sum at retirement
age. But whether this is better than an
imperfect private annuity market, in which some
annuitize little and others not at all, depends on the
implicit rates of return available on the social
insurance annuity, on the private annuity, and on
non-annuitized saving. It also depends on the degree
of diversity in preferred spending patterns in
retirement and in attitudes about bequests, since
complete annuitization at retirement would not
permit the purchase of retirement homes or other
major consumer outlays or the making of bequests
or inter vivos gifts.

The problem of information asymmetry in
private annuities could be reduced if individuals
purchased annuities at relatively young ages,
before they could accumulate much information
about their own likely mortality risks in old age.
Alternatively, a mandatory annuity could be
more attractive if it were based on the higher
return available in an investment-based program
rather than in a mature pure tax-financed
pay-as-you-go program.

Two conclusions follow from this. First, the
existence of asymmetric information may justify
a social insurance program (a government
annuity in this case) but does not necessarily do
so. The case for a mandatory annuity program
depends on calculations that could be done but
that have not yet been done. Second, the appropriateness
of a social insurance program and its
optimal size can be increased if the cost of the
social insurance option is reduced, something
that depends on how it is financed.
Consider now the second form of asymmetric
information that might provide a rationale for a
social insurance program: the government's inability
to distinguish those who are poor
through bad luck or inadvertence from those
who deliberately choose to act in a way that
leads to eligibility for free benefits. A primary
reason for social insurance programs is that
some individuals would not act in their own
interest, saving far too little for their retirement,
for health care after they are no longer working,
or to finance consumption when they are unemployed.
Although some economists may reject
the likelihood of such irrational behavior as a
basis for policy analysis, as individuals we all
recognize that such irrationality exists in practice.