preference functions, such that it
makes no difference to me whether I perceive
you as either better off or worse off.
Anything less descriptive of the human
condition could hardly be imagined. The
plain fact is that our lives are dominated
by precisely this interdependence of utility
functions which the Paretian optimum
denies. Selfishness, or indifference to the
welfare of others, is a knife edge between
benevolence on the one side and malevolence
on the other. It is something that is
very rare. We may feel indifferent towards
those whom we do not know, with whom
we have no relationships of any kind, but
towards those with whom we have relationships,
even the frigid relationship of
exchange, we are apt to be either benevolent
or malevolent. We either rejoice when
they rejoice, or we rejoice when they
mourn.

The almost complete neglect by economists
of the concepts of malevolence and
benevolence cannot be explained by their
inability to handle these concepts with
their usual tools. There are no mathematical
or conceptual difficulties involved in
inter-relating utility functions, provided
that we note that it is the perceptions that
matter [2]. The familiar tools of our
trade, the indifference map, the Edgeworth
box, and so on, can easily be expanded
to include benevolence or malevolence,
and indeed without this expansion
many phenomena, such as one-way transfers,
cannot be explained. Perhaps the
main explanation of ouLr neglect of these
concepts is the fact that we have concentrated
so heavily on exchange as the object
of our study, and exchange frequently
takes place under conditions of at least
relative indifference or selfishness, though
I argue that there is a minimum degree of
benevolence even in exchange without
which it cannot be legitimated and cannot
operate as a social organizer. We exchange
courtesies, smiles, the time of day
and so on with the clerk in the store, as
well as exchanging money for commodities.
The amount of benevolence which exchangers
feel towards each other need not
be large, but a certain minimum is essential.
If exchangers begin to feel malevolent
toward each other exchange tends to
break down, or can only be legitimated
under conditions of special ritual, such as
silent trade or collective bargaining.
Nevertheless, economists can perhaps
be excused for abstracting from benevolence
and malevolence, simply because
their peculiar baby, which is exchange,
tends to be that social organizer which lies
between these two extremes, and which
produces, if not selfishness, at least low
levels of malevolence and benevolence.
The threat system constantly tends to
produ-ce malevolence simply because of
the learning process which it engenders. A
threatener may begin by feeling benevolent
toward the threatened-"I am doing
this for your own good"-but threats almost
invariably tend to produce malevolence
on the part of the threatened towards
the threatener, and this is likely to
produce a type of behavior which will in
turn produce malevolence on the part of
the threatener towards the threatened.
This can easily result in a cumulative process
of increasing malevolence which may
or may not reach some kind of equilibrium.
The breakup of communities into
factions and into internal strife frequently
follows this pattern. At the other end of
the scale, the integrative system tends to
produce benevolence and those institutions
which are specialized in the integrative
system, such as the family, the
church, the lodge, the club, the aluimni association,
and so on, tend also to create
and organize benevolence, even beyond
the circle of their members. This is partly
because benevolence seems to be an importaint
element in establishing a satisfactory
personal identity, especially after the