emissions prove unmanageable for economic
or political reasons, some of these
"geoengineering" options will invite attention.
Second, if they do, and especially if
they prove to be within the budgetary capabilities
of individual nations, international
greenhouse diplomacy will be transformed.
VII
What remains nearly certain is that the
main responses to the greenhouse threat
will be adapting to climate as climate
changes and reducing carbon emissions.
(CFC's are potent greenhouse gases and, if
unchecked, might rival carbon dioxide in
decades to come; but international actions
are making good progress and are among
the cheapest ways of reducing greenhouse
emissions.)
Like estimates of warming, estimates of
the costs of reducing emissions require some
common but arbitrary objective to be comparable.
A doubling of carbon became the
conventional benchmark for warming estimates;
no such benchmark for reduced carbon
emissions has been adopted for estimating
costs. (In principle, the estimates could
adopt that doubling: the issue could be formulated
as the cost of retarding the doubling
time by a decade, two decades, or half
a century.) Most estimates take as their
target a reduction of emissions either to a
specified fraction of what they would be in
the absence of controls, or to some fixed
ratio to the emissions of 1990 or the projected
emissions of 2000 or 2010. The estimates
examine minimum-cost trajectories,
implicitly or explicitly assuming something
like a uniform tax on the carbon content of
fuel as the policy instrument. They typically
make some assumption about a "fallback"
energy technology, at least for electricity,
available at some price in some decade of
the next century. They have to project estimates
of non-price-induced improvements
in the use or avoidance of energy by industries
and households. And if they deal with
global emissions, they have to make some
assumption about the distribution of abatement
efforts among nations, especially
among the developing countries, which, including
China, account for about a quarter
of emissions now and would be expected to
account for half by the middle of the next
century.
Any estimate of the cost of abatement
needs therefore to specify at least half a
dozen target assumptions. Furthermore, the
estimates are produced by people and institutions
that do not simultaneously estimate
the costs associated with climate change,
either damages or costs of adapting; the
estimates do not optimize the combined
costs of abatement and climate change. A
"not unreasonable" target for reduction
might be delaying a doubling by, say, four
decades. One decade might be too trivial, a
century too ambitious, and four decades an
objective in which most audiences would be
interested. But nobody who makes such an
estimate wishes to be interpreted as proposing
that when all the uncertainties about
climate changes and their impacts have been
resolved, if they ever are resolved, the optimum
reduction in emissions will be found
to retard doubling by 40 years, or any other
specified period of time.
All I can do to summarize a multitude of
estimates is to specify an order of magnitude
that many economists and the Congressional
Budget Office would not consider
outrageous. That is the figure I mentioned
earlier, possibly 2 percent of GNP for the
developed countries and a similar, but even
much more uncertain, percentage of GNP
for the developing world. The uncertainty
for the developing world is partly due to the
estimates being mainly derived from the
American economy.4
Two characteristics of these estimates
need to be emphasized. One is that they
tend to assume optimal technological adjustment,
as in response to a carbon tax. To
the extent that carbon emissions are controlled
by direct regulatory measures, there
may be the usual expected inefficiencies,
and I leave the reader to make his own
adjustment.
4Several critiques and surveys of different abatement-
cost estimates are available (see Congressional
Budget Office, 1990; Joel Darmstadter, 1991; William
D. Nordhaus, 1991b; Energy Modeling Forum, 1992).