may have to be interpreted broadly, so as to
include pecuniary advantage but not be
limited by it. Critics who deride the notion
of "economic man" have a point, but usu-
ally the wrong point. Economic man is a
social, not a psychological, category. There
are activities in our culture in which it is
socially acceptable and expected that indi-
vidual pecuniary self-interest will be the
overriding decision criterion: choosing a
portfolio of securities, for example.6 There
are others in which it is not: choosing a
mate, for example.7 The labor market is
more complicated than either, of course,
and contains elements of both. Perhaps in
nineteenth-century Manchester labor was
bought and sold by "thorough-going compe-
tition" but I think that is unlikely to be a
good approximation to contemporary wage
setting. In particular, as I have emphasized,
there is nothing in the data or in common
observation to make you believe that mod-
erate excess supply will evoke aggressive
wage cutting on either side of the labor
market.
In
I draw two conclusions from this whole
train of thought, one about economics and
the other about the economy.
About economics: it -need not follow
that we old dogs have to learn a lot of new
tricks. It still seems reasonable to presume
that agents do the best they can, subject to
whatever constraints they perceive. But in
some contexts the traditional formulations
of the objective function and constraints
may be inappropriate. In the labor market,
the participants are firms and groups of
firms on one side, and individual workers,
organized trade unions, and informally
organized labor pools on the other. Grant
me that all feel constrained, to some nontriv-
ial degree, by social customs that have to
do with the wage and wage-setting proce-
dures. The result is that factor prices turn
up in our equations in unfamiliar ways. Let
me just mention a few examples from my
earlier list of hypotheses. If Keynes was
right about the conventional significance of
relative wages, then ratios of wage rates
appear in the objective functions on the
labor side. If the current or future perfor-
mance of workers depends on their feelings
that wage levels are fair, then wage rates
appear in the production functions con-
straining firms. If the individual worker's
utility function depends quite convention-
ally on current income, then the collective
objective function of a labor pool of identi-
cal workers might reasonably be a weighted
average of the utility of the wage and the
utility achievable when unemployed, with
weights equal to the employment and unem-
ployment fractions. This objective function
contains both wage and volume of employ-
ment as arguments; and it has the inter-
esting property that the marginal rate of
substitution between wage rate and employ-
ment can depend very sensitively on the size
of the unemployment insurance benefit.
Constrained maximization and partial or
complete reconciliation in the market can
still be the bread and butter of the macro
theorist. Spread with more palatable be-
havior assumptions, they may make a tastier
sandwich, and stick to the ribs.
About the economy: if the labor mar-
ket is often not in equilibrium, if wages are
often sticky, if they respond to nontradi-
tional signals, then there is a role for macro
policy and a good chance that it will be
effective. Equilibrium theories that conclude
the opposite may conceivably turn out to
have the right answer, but they simply
assume what they purport to prove. It is not
my argument that standard textbook policy
prescriptions are bound to be right. That
has to be worked out case by case. All I do
claim is that a reasonable theory of eco-
nomic policy ought to be based on a reason-
able theory of economic life.