mand prices needed to account for variation
in components of final expenditure. This
brings us to a fundamental set of new considerations
on the supply side.
II. The Task of Modeling Supply
If sector prices by line of production are
to be explained in a fundamental way by
sector costs, there will have to be an accompanying
explanation of sector outputs and
inputs. This brings us directly to the supply
side of things. While the supply side is
represented in the macro production function
from an aggregative point of view, once
we disaggregate the supply side by sector of
production, we encounter a new dimension.
The aggregate production function, in the
spirit of Paul Douglas and Charles Cobb,
expresses value-added as a function of primary
factor inputs, namely, labor and capital.
They were able to compress the technology
as they did, because at a full macro
level, one sector's output is someone else's
input, and for the economy as a whole, only
value-added is left in the output aggregation.
Intermediate inputs or outputs may be
neglected in the interests of avoiding double
counting. This way of looking at things is
strictly correct only for a closed economy.
In an open system, intermediate imports
must be treated like primary factor inputs.
At the sector level, however, there is no
question about the need to consider intermediate
inputs. Sector output (gross) is
properly a function of intermediate inputs,
labor input, and capital input-all sector
designated. The presently fashionable way
of summarizing this idea is to use the
KLEM production function, whose inputs
consist of capital, labor, energy, and materials.

The KLEM production function concept
is useful in partial studies of separate industries
or sectors, and has long been anticipated
in aggregative production function
studies. It has been routine in production
function studies in agriculture to use feed,
seed, fertilizer, and other intermediate inputs
as explanatory variables. The dependent
variable is generally a measure of gross
output gallons of milk, bushels of grain,
or bales of cotton. In manufacturing, one
of the earliest studies was by Ragnar Frisch.
He expressed isoquants for the output of
the Freia chocolate factory as a function of
fat content and molding-cooling input. One
of these is a pure material input and the
other stands for some capital, labor, and
general running cost input. In my own investigations
of U.S. railroad production
functions, I included fuel consumption (in
coal equivalents) as one of the factor inputs
together with labor and capital. The gross
output concept consisted of a log-linear
combination of ton miles and passenger
miles.2
These individual industry production
functions with a small number of intermediate
inputs are hardly substitutes for a detailed
input-output analysis on a general
system level. The role of input-output
analysis is to explain intermediate flows in
the economic system. The full system is
needed in order to provide an adequate supply
analysis because
(i) There is much more to economic activity
than can be summarized by the
system of final goods production.
(ii) The explanation of types of final
prices depends on highly specific
types of intermediate, as well as final,
goods/services prices.
The occurrence of bottlenecks potential
or realized as in the oil embargo of
1973--74 or the diversion of large amounts
of agricultural output to export markets as
in 1973 and 1975 are striking examples of
cases where there was a great deal of economic
activity going on outside final GNP
sectors. An economic understanding of
those activities and an estimate of their
macro impacts on the GNP could not be
readily derived from demand analysis without
consulting the table of intermediate
flows in I-0 analysis. These are only striking
examples. Many more have arisen in
the past, and more are bound to occur in
the future; therefore, the concern of this
presentation is not with singular events.
An adequate explanation of the price system,
especially on the cost side, cannot stop
2See the author.