One of the more egregious examples of
misplaced concreteness of theoretical concepts
involves the role of "money" in many
recent macroeconomic models. The "money"
of the models is frequently a pure-breed of
uniquely perfectly liquid cash. It is somehow
increased or decreased by the government or
monetary authority without changes in the
quantities of other assets. Some theorists then
find that in certain ideal types of costlessinformation,
perfectly competitive, priceflexible,
market-clearing economies, changes
in the quantity of money have no real effects
and merely bring proportionate changes in
prices.20 Then, to my astonishment, some of
our colleagues derive implications for the
optimal paths of M-1 or M-2 or "monetary
policy."

That the various monetary aggregates
which enter into our empirical formulations
are heterogeneous collections of frequently
endogenous elements in a broad spectrum of
financial assets and liabilities seems, in some
quarters at least, frequently to escape attention.
The theoretical concept of assets of
"outside," government money is a far cry
from the multitide of largely private instruments
that enter into transactions and
wealth. To the extent that these are or can be
readily quantified, they are a poor fit indeed
to the money of much economic theory and
the relations in which it is embodied.
While monetary policy is bedeviled by
confusion with regard to measures and variables
of analysis, fiscal policy is one big
mess. And confusion here has contributed
mightily to misdirection in macroeconomic
theory and policy.

As I have pointed out elsewhere,2' motivation
for the macroeconomic, rational expectations
revolution, or counterrevolution,
stemmed at least in part from the perception,
as so attributed by Robert Lucas and
Thomas Sargent, that "massive government
budget deficits and high rates of monetary
expansion" in the 1970s were accompanied
not by the decreasing unemployment predicted
by Keynes, but by growing unemployment
and growing inflation.22 I have already
alluded to problems with measures of "money.
" The measured "massive budget deficits"
observed by Lucas and Sargent, and by so
many others, were simply not the deficits of
meaningful economic theory.
The significance of a deficit, any deficit, is
that it adds to net debt. When any agent
spends more than its income it must borrow
or sell off assets. When government runs a
deficit it must therefore add to private assets,
either in the form of holdings of government
debt or the assets government has liquidated.
It is this increase in private assets that, even
more clearly in neoclassical than Keynesian
theory, as noted many years ago by Gottfried
Haberler (1941), A. C. Pigou (1943,
1947), and Don Patinkin (1948, 1951, and
1965), induces an increase in private spending.


To have this effect, as the neoclassical
argument made clear, the increase in private
assets must be real. But if the government
"deficit" is accompanied by substantial and
rising inflation, the real, market value of
outstanding government debt may well decline
more than the amount of the nominal
deficit. In that case, those alleged deficits
become real surpluses, which economic theory,
Keynesian and neoclassical alike, indicate
should be a depressant to consumption
and, unless one has inordinate faith that
goods markets always clear, to real aggregate
demand and output.

That is exactly what happened in the late
1970s. The cumulative total of $153 billion
of nominal deficits in the Carter years, from
1977 to 1980, were real surpluses totaling
$72 billion. 24 The federal budget did not