cause we are adapted to trade, and because we
are good at copying successful behavior. Nev-
ertheless, such processing deficiencies as dis-
junction and innumeracy do confuse choice.
Ellen Peters at Decision Research studies the
ability of people to understand and logically
relate numbers, an essential skill in trading that
involves prices or barter terms, or more com-
plex valuations requiring risk assessment or dis-
counting. Even if individuals do not consciously
"run the numbers" to determine choices, they
still have to form perceptions and make judg-
ments based on numerical information. The be-
havioral evidence is that innumeracy rates are
high and significantly distort decisions. Peters
and her coauthors (Peters et al., forthcoming)
find that half the population is unable to read
and make sense of numbers in the newspaper.
Among those who score badly on a battery that
measures basic numerical and logical skills, one
finds errors such as altering ratings of risk and
choices when probabilities are presented as
number of successes out of a hundred, number
of failures out of a hundred, or as percent suc-
cesses. In one telling experiment, subjects are
offered a prize if they draw a red jellybean from
their choice of bowls. Bowl A contains 9 red
and 91 white beans, while bowl B contains 1 red
and 9 white beans, so the odds of success are
objectively better with bowl B. Nevertheless,
subjects who score low in numeracy often
choose bowl A because it "gives more chances
to win."
One could be hard-nosed about such people
and say that if they have not educated them-
selves sufficiently to look after their own inter-
ests in markets, the consequences are on their
shoulders. The economically unsuccessful can
vote, however, and they demonstrably have  used the vote at various times and places to pick
bad governments and bad economic policies.
The argument against "sink or swim" is that
when designing market mechanisms, it is in
society's interest to take a protective interest in
this segment of the population, building in in-
formation and decision-making aids, and pro-
tection from market wolves, which give these
people a chance of success, thereby increasing
the fairness of these mechanisms and support
for them. This argument becomes stronger
when one considers the sociality of choice, and
observes that there is more than "self' in
self-interest.
V. Social Risk
In risk perception, humans act less as
individuals and more as social beings who
have internalized social pressures and del-
egated their decision-making processes to
institutions. They manage as well as they
do, without knowing the risks they face,
by following social rules on what to ig-
nore.
Mary Douglas and
Aaron Wildavsky, 1982
Man is a social animal, identified with family
and kin, and with troops, tribes, clubs, ethnici-
ties, and nationalities. This has several conse-
quences for economic choice behavior. First,
individuals may look to their social networks
for information. Second, they may look to social
networks for approval, and use social account-
ability to limit choice. Social norms can be
comforting, limiting options and regrets, but
they can also lead to embarrassment, ostracism,