excessive fees and overselling. However, the
sweep of decentralization and privatization is, I
believe, widely viewed by economists as an
almost universal success, with the failures
due to correctable flaws in market design. Romantics
of the economic right would carry the
concepts of self-interested consumers and
free markets even further, embracing a withering
of authority and a nirvana of Hayekian
self-reliance.
Most reasoned discussions of privatization
among economists concentrate on information
asymmetries, incentives, economies of scale
and scope, risk management, and the relative
efficiency and sustainability of alternative
forms of market organization. There are serious
economic questions as to whether, for example,
the technologies of network industries inevitably
lead to concentration, with an attendant loss
of choice and efficiency. There are serious questions
as to whether adverse selection will defeat
the efficiency gains from competition in multiple-
payer privatized insurance markets. It is a
worthy scientific enterprise to study these issues,
and look to the historical record of privatization
for answers, but not one that I will take
up in this paper. I will concentrate, instead, on
the decision-making of consumers, the market
outcomes they achieve as a result, and the influence
of these outcomes on their attitudes
toward markets.
In the general public we see widespread unease
about market solutions. Free trade and
globalization, privatization of social insurance,
and deregulation of energy markets all elicit
opposition from many consumers, sometimes
reasoned but often inchoate. It is no coincidence
that support for market solutions is concentrated
among the economically successful, and opposition
among the less successful. Free choice
has moral appeal, but moral fiber is strongest
when not cut by self-interest. Market mechanisms
have to compete for votes with alternative
resource allocation schemes more favorable to
the underdogs; and in this competition, fairness
to me is my primary concern, efficiency is
someone else's problem. In addition, there is
ideological opposition to market solutions. In
the liberal orthodoxy, markets are dominated by
the powerful and rapacious, and the motives of
government bureaucrats are purer than those of
private bureaucrats. In this ideology, the process
of privatization often serves the interests of the
politically connected. The Enrons and Haliburtons
of this world reinforce these views. However,
ideologies themselves are woven from
human sentiments, and antipathy to market solutions
is more than just doctrine.
My concern in this paper is that it is not
enough to find ways to handle information and
technology issues in privatization if consumers
are not up to the task of functioning satisfactorily
in such markets. The argument is not that
consumers should be coddled; they may need to
see the stick to get the incentives for selfreliance
right. However, the efficiency and stability
of an economy requires that all consumers
be part of the franchise, in reality and in perception,
so that good economic policies, including
privatization and free markets when they
make sense, receive broad support. I will discuss
these issues at two levels. First, I will give
a selective review of the behavioral evidence on
consumer decision-making, and how this influences
market outcomes and attitudes toward
markets. Second, I will summarize results that
my research group has obtained on a current,
concrete privatization issue, the new Medicare
Part D prescription drug program, which is offering
market choices within a social insurance
program. I will ask whether consumers are, in
fact, able to manage their choices adequately in
this new market, and whether they will, in fact,
gain from the added choice offered by privatization.
The following fundamental questions,
explored in pioneering papers by James J. Choi
et al. (2003) and Richard H. Thaler and Cass R.
Sunstein (2003), comprise an important scientific
agenda:
* Are consumers sufficiently consistent in advancing
their self-interest in specific markets
to achieve the levels of efficiency and wellbeing
that privatization promises?
* What can be done as part of the design of
privatization, such as information, instruction,
and support structures, to help consumers
satisfactorily pursue their self-interest?
* When privatization is in consumers' selfinterest,
how can they be enlightened and
convinced to support the change?