A much more substantial reduction in the
effective tax rate would be achieved by financ-
ing the increased cost of Social Security and
Medicare by a funded system that would permit
future benefits to be financed without a large
increase in the tax rate. Moreover, to the extent
that the additional saving that individuals do
earns a favorable rate of return, they might not  consider it a tax at all. I will return to this issue
later when I discuss Social Security reform
more fully.
Designing Programs by Balancing Protec-
tion and Distortion, while Seeking Reforms that
Improve the Available Tradeoff.-Social insur-  ance programs generally involve a tradeoff of
protection and distortion. Social insurance pro-
grams protect individuals against undesirably
low levels of consumption during old age, spells
of unemployment, or when hit by large medical
bills. They also protect individuals from the
need to work longer than health warrants, to
accept a job when additional searching would
be adequately productive, or to forego appropri-
ate medical care because of an inability to pay.
But the same social insurance programs also
distort incentives in ways that cause inefficient
use of resources: early retirement, low saving,
unproductively long job searches, and excessive
consumption of medical care.
Social insurance program parameters should
be chosen to balance protection and distortion.
The level of Social Security benefits should
reflect the fact that high benefits relative to
previous income improve the protection against
reduced consumption in old age but also depress
saving and may induce early retirement. A high
level of unemployment insurance benefits helps
the unemployed to maintain consumption but
also encourages longer spells of unemployment
and the choice of jobs that have a greater like-
lihood of leading to a layoff. Low co-payments
in health insurance reduce the risk of foregoing
needed care or suffering a major drop in other
consumption, but they also lead to an increased
demand for care that is worth less than its cost
of production. More complete protection in  each program also raises the program cost and,
therefore, creates greater distortions through the
tax system.
As protection becomes more complete, the
marginal value of protection declines and the
incremental distortion rises. The primary goal
of social insurance should, therefore, generally
be to prevent catastrophic losses: poverty in old
age, long-term loss of income when unem-
ployed, very expensive out-of-pocket medical
costs, and the consequences of permanent
disability. More generally, at the optimum,
the marginal value of additional protection
should just equal the marginal cost of the
distortion. Economists can help the policy
process by evaluating the protection and dis-
tortion created by different changes in pro-
gram design.
Useful economic analysis can go beyond select-
ing an optimal point on a protection-distortion
frontier. It is important to seek ways to shift the
frontier, permitting less distortion at each level of
protection. Reforms based on individual accounts
that I describe later in the paper would achieve
that improvement.
Redesigning Programs to Keep Pace with
Changing Conditions.--Three important changes
that should influence the design of our social in-
surance programs have occurred since those
programs began: a changed economy, new tech-
nology, and a different understanding of the effect
of government programs on individual behavior.
The Social Security and unemployment in-
surance programs were created during the de-
pression of the 1930s when individual savings
had been destroyed by widespread bank failures
and when many individuals had been unem-
ployed for a year or more because of a lack of
aggregate demand. Keynesian economists in the
1940s like Harvard's Seymour Harris praised
the unfunded character of the new Social Secu-
rity program for its ability to depress national
saving and stimulate aggregate demand (Harris,
1941). In contrast to those depression years,
conditions in the past half-century have been
very different, with relatively low unemploy-
ment rates and a system of government deposit
insurance that protects individual savings. The
unemployment insurance and Social Security
that may have been appropriate in the 1930s is
no longer appropriate for the economy of the
twenty-first century.