in other words, the additional
employment would be willingly supplied
aloing the second real wage path. If the
answer is affirmative, then that one percentage
point of unemployment is involuntary.

For Keynes's reasons, a negative answer
cannot necessarily be inferred from
failure of money wage rates to fall or even
decelerate. Actual unemployment and the
real wage path associated with it are not
necessarily an equilibrium. Rigidities in
the path of money wage rates can be explained
by workers' preoccupation with
relative wages and the absence of any
cetntral economy-wide mechanism for altering
all money wages together.
According to the natural rate hypothesis,
there is just one rate of unemployment
compatible with stea(ly wage and price
inflation, andl this is in the long run compatible
with any constant rate of change of
prices, positive, zero, or negative. Only
at the natural rate of unemployment are
workers content with current and prospective
real wages, content to have their real
wages rise at the rate of growth of productivity.
Along the feasible path of real
wages they would not wish to accept any
larger volume of employment. Lower unemployment,
therefore, can arise only from
economy-wide excess demand for labor
and must generate a gap between real
wages (lesired and real wages earned. The
gap evokes increases of money wages designed
to raise real wages faster than productivity.
But this intention is always
frustrated, the gap is never closed, money
wages and prices accelerate. By symmetrical
argument, unemployment above
the natural rate signifies excess supply in
labor markets and ever accelerating deflation.
Older classical economists regarded
constancy of money wage rates as indicative
of full employment equilibrium, at
which the allocation of time between work
and other pursuits is revealed as voluntary
and optimal. Their successors make the
same claims for the natural rate of unemployment,
except that in the equilibrium
money wages are not necessarily
constant but growing at the rate of productivity
gain plus the experienced and
expected rate of inflation of prices.
III. Is Zero-Inflation Unemployment
Voluntary and Optimal?
There are, then, two conflicting interpretations
of the welfare value of employment
in excess of the level consistent with
price stability. One is that additional
employment does not produce enough to
compensate workers for the value of other
uses of their time. The fact that it generates
inflation is taken as prima facie
evidence of a welfare loss. The alternative
view, which I shall argue, is that the responses
of money wages and prices to
changes in aggregate demand reflect
mechanics of adjustment, institutional
constraints, and relative wage patterns
and reveal nothing in particular about
individual or social valuations of unemployed
time vis-a-vis the wages of employment.

On this rostrum four years ago, Milton
Friedman identified the noninflationary
natural rate of unemployment with "equilibrium
in the structure of real wage
rates" (p. 8). "The 'natural rate of unemployment,
' " he said, ". . . is the level
that would be ground out by the Walrasian
system of general equilibrium equations,
provided that there is embedded in them
the actual structural characteristics of the
labor and commodity markets, including
market imperfections, stochastic variability
in demands and supplies, the costs of
getting information about job vacancies
and labor availabilities, the costs of mobility,
and so on." Presumably this
Walrasian equilibrium also has the usual
optimal properties; at any rate, Friedman
advised the monetary authorities not to
seek to improve upon it. But in fact we
know little about the existence of a