carry this too far. Just as I am eschewing
any Cassandra-like pronouncements tonight,
so I have promised myself to suppress
the oracular and even the avuncular
(Dutch-type) mood evoked by these occasions.
So I shall press on.

III. Standards of Judgment
From the foregoing, it is evident that I
feel, first, that economists have gone beyond
beguiling humility and welcome selfcriticism
to the point of almost neurotic
self-rebuke, and second, that press and
public have all too lustily taken up the
cry-in part taking us at our word, in
part misinterpreting us, and in part reflecting
their belief that, after the high
promise of the 1960's, we have failed them
in not foreseeing and forestalling the
crises of the 1970's: stagflation, energy
shortage, and the environment.
In my quest for a more balanced perspective
on the state of economics, the
next task is to set up some standards for
judging the quality and performance of
economists. Since we have developed no
measures of output or allocative efficiency,
no capital-output or cost-benefit ratios, for
the economics "industry," I will have to
fall back on more subjective and less quantitative
measures in judging its quality and
contributions.

My mixed bag of criteria includes (1)
the quality of inputs; (2) the demands for
our services; (3) as a proxy for a measure
of outputs, the record of accomplishment
in a given field (public finance); (4) finally,
the cruelest test, our handling of the economics
of inflation.

The potential of economics for informing
and improving public policy depends on
the stock of human capital, technology
and tools at its command. Here, economics
has no difficulty in holding its head high,
especially in terms of the striking advances
of the past three or four decades.
Harry Johnson may be a trifle extravagant
in his assessment that the United
States now has "perhaps fifty economic
departments of an average quality comparable
to the average quality of the four
or five best departments in the whole
world in the pre-World War II period. . ."
(1973), but only a trifle. Another attest to
professional quality, already referred to,
might be put this way: Show me another
field that has enough inner strength to
confess so much remaining weakness (and
to carry on so much open controversy).
Humility where we have things to be
humble about (and we do) is a becoming
trait. But coupling it with pride where we
have things to be genuinely proud about
is hardly a deadly sin.

Accompanying the growth in the quantity
and quality of economic brainpower
have been striking advances in the techniques
and tools with which economists
work. For this audience, I can speak in
shorthand about the strengthened analytical
base of micro- and macroeconomics;
the methodological revolution that moved
us from the rationalist-historical approach
into the age of quantification, with its
insistence on systematic measurement of
the shapes of economic functions and empirical
testing of hypotheses and its use of
econometrics and simulation techniques
(with a powerful assist from the computer)
; and such conceptual advances as
those in the economics of human capital,
of cost-benefit relations, of uncertainty, of
control, of transactions and information
costs, of "second best," and of the allocation
of time.

In normative economics and the analysis
of value-laden social problems, new frontiers
in the study of economic behavior are
being opened up by survey research techniques
(especially by the Michigan Survey
Research Center), by efforts to measure
nonmarket benefits or values (especially
by the National Bureau of Economic Research)