them to be lower later.59 Politically, the trust
fund is very likely to be used for Social Security
purposes in the sense that the constraint on
future Social Security expenditures includes the
value of the assets in the trust fund. A separate
issue is the extent to which the higher payroll
taxes since 1983 increased national capital.60
This is a source of controversy, with a wide
range of presumptions and no ability to settle
the question econometrically.61 I believe that a
large part was saved-despite the large federal
deficit outside Social Security for the 1980's
and early 1990's. In my view, a larger unified
deficit, if Social Security had not been in surplus,
would not have had a strong effect on tax
and spending legislation. Congress had great
difficulty in legislating tax and spending
changes to lower the deficit. Without the Social
Security surplus, a somewhat larger unified deficit
would not have changed the basic character
of the situation-a deficit widely perceived as
being too large and a difficulty in raising taxes
and lowering spending. Looking beyond the
baby boomers we do not currently perceive a
need to single out a cohort that will differ
greatly from others and perhaps call for something
other than a smooth adjustment of taxes
and benefits.

Redistribution across cohorts has not been
done in a lump-sum fashion, but through the
choice of tax rates and benefit formulas. Thus
the redistribution has affected labor supplies as
well as savings decisions. In the early days, the
generous benefit formulas (in effect or antici-


pated in the future) subsidized labor, just as the
lower benefits relative to taxes for younger
workers today taxes labor.62 This is similar to
the role of the progressive benefit formula discussed
above. Given the pattern of redistribution
by cohort shown in Figure 1, much of
redistribution served as an incentive for much of
the working life of recipients. This is in contrast
with analysis in two-period models where the
initial elderly recipients of transfers receive a
lump-sum transfer and all later cohorts have
implicit taxes on earnings to pay for it. Both the
transfers and the taxes have influenced labor
supply.

VI. Automatic and Legislated Adjustments to
Aggregate Realizations and Risk Allocation
The actuarial projection for the 1983 reform
envisioned a buildup of the trust fund, followed
by its decline back to the precautionary level of
one year's expenditures at the end of the 75-
year projection period. It has not worked out
that way. Instead of having just enough money
for 75 years of expenditures, plus a small trust
fund at the end, it is now projected that the trust
fund buildup will be sufficient to pay currently
scheduled benefits only until 2042. That is, the
policy that was designed for a 75-year horizon
will, if the projection is correct, cover all of
expenditures for only 60 years. By the scale of
preparing for long-term outcomes, that does not
seem to me to be too bad. Of course one could
argue, with hindsight, that Congress should
have looked further into the future than 75
years, although it was hard enough to reach
agreement on legislation even with that target.
Current discussions have extended the notion
of actuarial balance to include "sustainability"-
that the ratio of the trust fund to annual expenditures
not decline at the end of the horizon.
This criterion of sustainable solvency is meant
to avoid a repeat of the post-1983 experience
where the projected actuarial deficit returned
quickly (although the trust fund exhaustion date
was distant). Projected deficits returned quickly
because of what is called the terminal year
problem, or the cliff problem. That is, each year,