respond to its relative price (and to the ex-
pected price that so strongly influences its
current price). But a year's production, even
at an historically enormous real price, adds
very little to the current market supply, com-
pared to that which is available from inven-
tories. Changes in the market price may af-
fect, at least modestly, the quantities of gold
demanded: by dentists, by manufacturers of
jewelry and objets d'art, or in industry (as a
conductor or chemical). But such changes in
quantities demanded are likewise small rela-
tive to the size of the stock; and even the
manufacture of gold objects does not really
remove them from the inventory of gold.
Indeed, unmined gold (and the shares of
gold mining companies) are in effect part of
the inventory, too.
Although the price of gold has some effect
on its rates of discovery and production, as
well as on its consumption (in the sense of
its complete and permanent removal from
potential market supply), these responses of
quantities produced and consumed are truly
minimal in comparison with the size of out-
standing inventories. Thus, the market price
of gold depends mainly on peoples' (or, in
the past, on governments') willingness at that
price to hold the immense existing inventory
of gold. And this means that the current
price of gold depends mainly on expectations
of its future price. As noted earlier, the cur-
rent price of a standardized commodity can
diverge from any expected future price only
by the relatively small costs of storage plus
interest (and the cost of assuming the risk of
an incorrect expectation). But, in the case of
gold, a changed expectation of future price is
not soon erased by a changed rate of gold
production, nor by an altered level of any
consumption that subtracts permanently
from the stock. There may always be some
normal, long-run equilibrium price of gold
that would exactly equate current production
and current consumption (in the sense of
permanent disappearance). But that normal
price does not discipline the actual market
price of gold in the way that the normal,
long-run equilibrium price of wheat disci-
plines its current market price. Rather-in
the absence of a fixed monetary price of
gold-its current price depends overwhelm-
ingly on the current expectation of what its
future price will be. And that future price
will depend on the expectation then of its
subsequent price.
Such a market is best characterized by
borrowing Keynes' parable (pp. 154-160) of
the beauty contest, which he used to explain
share prices. The price level of shares, he
suggested, depends on each market par-
ticipant's calculation of what the other par-
ticipants are likely to expect it to be. It is
analogous to the contest to choose a beauty
queen, he said, in which the prizes go to
those who select the candidate for queen
thought most beautiful by the largest num-
ber of other contestants. Instead of selecting
the candidate who is the most beautiful, each
contestant tries to calculate which candidate
is most likely to be chosen by other con-
testants. But once each realizes that others
will be choosing on the same basis, he is
forced to speculate about what the average
opinion will be of what the average opinion
is. And that speculation can be carried to
progressively higher degrees, Keynes sug-
gested. Given no more solid a basis than this
for valuing shares, said Keynes, the price of
shares can be almost anything-and is likely
at times to be highly unstable.
Why does anyone buy gold at $52 an
ounce-or at $520 an ounce? Why does any-
one sell it at that price? Because the buyer
expects that the price tomorrow will exceed
$52 by more than the cost of carrying an
ounce of gold; and the seller expects that it
may be less than $52 plus carrying costs
tomorrow. Each such expectation in turn
reflects buyers' and sellers' judgments about
what buyers and sellers will be expecting
tomorrow for the day after tomorrow. The
only other rational reason for buying or sell-
ing gold is the pure pleasure of risk assump-
tion-better known as gambling. And there
is surely much of that in the gold market.
Presumably, pure gambling has little net ef-
fect on the price, although it does raise the
incomes or employment of brokers.4