leads to greater creation of knowledge. First, the
larger the population, the greater the benefit
from a given improvement in productivity resulting
from new knowledge. Second, with a
larger population, there are more individuals
capable of making a significant discovery or
adding to knowledge. It is not that today we are
smarter or more intelligent than populations a
century ago, two centuries ago, or a millennium
ago. Presumably the distribution of talents or
intelligence is the same today as at any past
time. But there are many, many more of us and
if the distribution of talents has not changed,
there are many more individuals capable of
advancing knowledge.
But it is not only that there are more of us
available to add to the world's knowledge, but
with the improvements in agricultural productivity,
the expansion of the cities, and the very
large increases in real per capita incomes that
have occurred over the past two centuries, institutions
have been created specifically to advance
and transmit knowledge. I refer to
universities and research institutes, including
both public and private ones. It was not that
prior to the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
that there were no individuals who had the
intelligence, time, curiosity, and energy for the
creation of knowledge. But their numbers were
limited. Our lives, however, are greatly influenced
by those who developed the reaper and
the binder, the internal combustion engine, the
steam engine, the railroad, electricity, the telephone,
and by those who discovered the small
pox vaccine and the germ theory of disease. But
by the beginning of the twentieth century their
effects on the lives of individuals were limited
compared to the effects of the recent increases
in knowledge and their applications.
When as many as 80 to 85 percent of the
world's labor force was engaged in farming, a
small percentage of a much smaller world population
had the time and resources to devote to
producing nonfood products, such as clothing,
tools, roads, and housing, let alone acquiring
new knowledge and technology. In 1990 in the
developed world no more than 10 percent of its
labor force was engaged in agriculture and in
the developing world approximately 60 percent
(World Bank, 1997 p. 220). Not only are there
about seven times as many people as there were
in 1800, but a significant percentage of this
much larger population specializes in the creation
of knowledge compared to the very small
number who could do so just two centuries ago.
The modern university, with many faculty devoting
their time to research in science and
graduate education, is a very recent creationsuch
institutions hardly existed before the middle
of the nineteenth century. German
universities dominated the world' s graduate education
in the nineteenth century. Yet as of
1900 in all the German universities there were
only 38,000 students and 1,830 faculty
(Friedrich Paulsen, 1908 p. 193); these are totals
for all colleges and universities, not just those
engaged in graduate education.
In 1869-1970, only a single Ph.D. was
awarded in the United States (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, Department of Commerce, 1960).
The development of colleges and universities
after 1869-1970 was quite remarkable. In that
year there were 563 colleges and universities
with a total faculty of 5,553 and 52,000 students.
The contribution to new knowledge had
to be limited; there were approximately ten faculty
members per institution, including, I assume,
the president who probably spent much
of the available time trying to find enough financial
resources to keep the institution open.
Sixty years later, for example, there were
82,000 faculty, 1.1 million students, and 2,299
doctorates awarded. Further rapid expansion of
higher education came after World War II and
by 1994/1995 there were an estimated 915,000
faculty, 14.3 million students, and 43,000 doctorates
awarded (Thomas I). Snyder, 1993).
In part, as a result of World War II, the
governmental support of research in universities
and federal research laboratories was greatly
expanded and many private research institutes
were created and developed. Prior to World
War II federal support of research was largely
concentrated in agriculture and the military.6
6One of the great achievements of the presidency of
Abraham Lincoln was the creation of a land grant college in
each state. These colleges were to specialize in agriculture
and engineering and to provide e-ducation that emphasized
the practical as well as the theoretical. Approximately two
decades later the agricultural experiment stations were established.
The establishment of the agricultural experiment
stations were especially noteworthy. Agriculture was a competitive
industry, which meant that no individual farmer
could devote any significant amount of resources to