costs of industry show in losses-in deductions
from net income-unless they are
recovered through revenue from sales in
markets.
This difference in accounting methods
corresponds to differences in the strength
of the argument for including the two
types of progress-generating expense in the
costs that make up the denominator of our
ratio of benefit-stream to costs. Where the
expenses need not be recovered through
revenues generated by them, groups of decision
makers were given legal authority to
proceed on the assumption that the knowledge
so produced or distributed has considerable
nonmarket value, i.e., value which
is not measured as part of the economic
benefit-stream. As a rule this is true even
where a nonprofit organization13 makes its
services available through sales in markets,
as is the case in a subsector of the education
sector. Even these nonprofit organizations
are heavily subsidized and/or the
acquisition of the type of service they offer
has been made compulsory by a political
decision limiting the market decision of the
customers to the choice of a source of
supply. The question arises therefore
whether the practice of valuation at cost
to the nonprofit institution, without regard
to recovery of the cost through revenue,
should for our purpose be taken at its face
value in the sense that we net out, and thus
exclude from the cost-side of our social
benefit-cost ledger, the costs of all items
that the national accountant treats as if
they created equivalent values by definition.
In a preliminary step let us do so,
but before trying to appraise the merits
and deficiencies of this version of our ratio,
let us take a look also at another way of
going about the matter.
We may, alternatively, decide to include
in our cost-base the costs of nonprofit institutions
along with those of the profitseeking
ones and thus obtain a ratio based
on all-inclusive costs. This ratio will, of
course, come out lower than the first.
We must remember, however, that even
the cost-base which we call "all-inclusive"
excludes items which are interpreted here
not as costs of progress-generating inputs
but as expenditures influencing the effectiveness
of such inputs.14 In the first
place, we shall have to limit ourselves to
the analysis of American data; hence the
costs incurred abroad belong among those
automatically excluded. Secondly, medical
expenses, other health-related components
of the consumer budget, and types of
public investment bearing on the effectiveness
of progress-generating inputs are
excluded (netted out) even from our larger
cost-base because it is implied that these
expenses become justified by the specific
output which they buy, aside from their
effect on productivity-gains. The same is
not "automatically" taken for granted for
any part of the input we define as progressgenerating.
No part of that input is excluded
from our larger cost-base, and while
part of it is excluded from our smaller
base, we emphasize that both bases require
attention in our analysis. Thereby we
leave a range open for personal (subjective)
valuation of the contribution of progressgenerating
inputs aside from their contribution
to measurable productivity
gains.
The proposition suggests itself that the