generally, can be explained by economists' ad-
herence to positive economics.86 Friedman's
(1953) essay on positive economics describes
the methodological implications of such belief.
In particular, he says that economic theorists
should strive for parsimonious modeling. Ac-
cording to Friedman, they should even forsake
realistic assumptions in pursuit of such parsi-
mony. Maximization models with only objec-
tive arguments of utility have been defined as
more parsimonious than models where people,
additionally, lose utility insofar as they, or oth-
ers, fail to live up to their standards. As a result,
whatever the empirical validity or relevance of
such norms, positive economics has a method-
ological bias against their consideration. It priv-
ileges models without norms.
The prescriptions of positive economics re-
garding the conduct of empirical investigation
compound the bias against norms. Friedman
says that economists should not pay heed to the
stated intentions of decision makers, which
would include their norms as to how they and
others should behave. Instead, empirical work
should test only hypotheses that economists
consider to be based on parsimonious models.
If economic tests had great power, then it
would be easy, of course, to follow Friedman's
dictum of making more and more refined tests
of hypotheses with decreasing parsimony. If
norms really do affect behavior, this method
would reject models without norms and in due
course would arrive at models where people's
views regarding how they should behave affect
decision making. But economic tests lack
power. All economic models are very imprecise
in their specification of the independent vari-
able, the nature of the dependent variables, the
nature of leads and lags, and the nature of
residuals. Yet worse, most economic problems
involve simultaneity (as in supply and demand),
making establishment of causality difficult. In
almost any instance, such a large number of
models can be fitted statistically that it is ex-
tremely hard-and perhaps impossible-to sta-
tistically reject all the variants of models
without norms. As a result, the program of
positive economics-with its initial nulls of  models based only on utility with objective
variables verified only by statistical hypothesis
testing-has severe bias against explanations of
economic phenomena where norms play a role.
Summers (1986) illustrates the severity of
this bias. The conventional test of the efficient
markets hypothesis-that stock prices are the
expected value of future returns-looks for au-
tocorrelations of the excess returns on stocks
relative to bonds. Following Summers, it would
take approximately 5,000 years of data with
such a test to obtain as much as 50 percent
rejection of an alternative model where stock
prices are more than 30 percent away from their
fundamentals 35 percent of the time. With such
lack of power, nulls are important. When they
are not rejected, alternative theories, such as
those with norms, are not even considered. This
lecture has illustrated such reversion to norm-
less nulls. Consumption behavior, investment
behavior, and wage and price behavior-the three
most important components of most macro mod-
els-all display excess sensitivity relative to re-
spective neutralities. All of these violations could
be easily explained by norms. Yet in each case
economists have sought to explain such viola-
tions of classical theory by norm-less models.
In contrast to reliance on statistical testing,
disciplines other than economics typically put
much greater weight on a naturalistic ap-
proach. This approach involves detailed case
studies. Such observation of the small often
has been the key to the understanding of the
large. To me, the most dramatic example of
such a relation between the small and the
large occurs in the structure of life itself.
Francis Crick and James D. Watson87 conjec-
tured correctly that if they could describe the
crystalline structure of a single DNA mole-
cule, they would have unlocked the secret of
life. The duality between the structure of the
DNA molecule and the way in which organ-
isms are generated and reproduced is one of
the most beautiful findings of human knowl-
edge. It indicates the sense in which Crick and
Watson were, indeed, profoundly correct.
What are the implications for social science?
Positive economics, with its emphasis on statis-
tical analysis of populations, would suggest that