exaggerated the possible effects of lower tax
rates on supply and some of whom simply
hoped that deficits would pressure Congress
to cut back domestic spending. The size of
the deficits was also masked by the assumption
of unspecified future spending cuts, an
assumption reflecting the view that the U.S.
government was operating a lot of wasteful
programs with little public support which
Congress could soon be persuaded to reduce
or eliminate.

Both in the administration and in Congress,
decisions were made at a breakneck
pace, in a highly charged political atmosphere,
amid conflicting claims and competing
forecasts, with little attention to the consistency
of monetary and fiscal policy and
mostly by people with little experience in
evaluating the reasonableness of any set of
economic estimates. (See David Stockman,
1986, ch. 3.) When the dust settled, we found
ourselves with a serious recession that
nobody expected, and an escalating structural
budget deficit that nobody wanted. It
was hardly economic policy's finest hour.
The agonizing-and so far only partially
successful- struggle to correct the mistakes
of 1981 have kept the economic policy process
under stress and have continued to
dramatize some of its weakest aspects. The
struggle between the president and the Congress
over deficit solutions illustrates the
price we pay for the separation of powers.
The fact that fiscal policy has become an
exercise in damage control, while the Federal
Reserve makes all the important decisions
about the economy, underlines the separation
of monetary and fiscal policy. The
sensitivity of deficits to the pace of the economy
advertises the unreliability of macroeconomic
forecasts. The fact that all the actions
that could be taken to correct the deficit are
unpleasant ones drags out the annual agony
of budget setting interminably and dramatizes
how layered and cumbersome it has
become.

Small wonder that the strains of the last
few years, with a little help from the press,
have reinforced the negative stereotypes that
economists and political decision makers
have of each other. Political decision makers
see economists as quarrelsome folks who
cannot forecast, cannot agree, cannot express
themselves clearly, and have strong
ideological biases. Economists return the
favor by regarding politicians as shortsighted,
interested only in what is popular
with the electorate, and unwilling to face
hard decisions. All of the stereotypes are
partly right.

Politicians embody their stereotype in
economist jokes. Economists have retaliated
more massively by applying the tools of their
trade to the political system itself. Public
choice theory essentially asks the question:
what would economic policy be like if our
stereotype of politicians were entirely true?
The answer provides considerable insight
into observed political behavior and certainly
helps explain why the idealistic economist
so often fails to find the system simulating
the public interest motivation of the
philosopher queen.

III. Some Drastic Nonsolutions
Widespread concern that the economic
policy process is not working well has
spawned proposals for drastic change that
move in two quite different directions: one
toward circumscribing the discretion of
elected officials by putting economic policy
on automatic pilot and the other toward
making elected officials more directly responsible
to the voters for their policies.
The automatic pilot approach 'flows from
the perspective of public choice theory that
the decisions of democratically elected officials
interested in staying in office cannot
be counted on to produce economic policy
in the social interest, but are likely to be
biased toward excessive government spending,
growing deficits, special interest tax and
spending programs, and easier money. A
way to overcome these biases is to agree in
advance on strict rules of economic policy,
such as a fixed monetary growth path or
constitutionally required balance in the
federal budget.

Even if one accepts the premises, however,
firm rules are hard to define in a rapidly
changing world -no one seems to know what
"money" is anymore-and can easily lead
to perverse results. Recent experience with