DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
and so even less pressure for legislation? For
example, we could use additional adjustments
depending on real wage growth. Or we could go
directly to automatic adjustments based on
overall financial balance so Congress never
again needed to legislate.77 Such indexing
would need to choose the mix of revenue and
benefit changes in the response to imbalance. It
strikes me as implausible that a system with a
sensible tax rate would want to do all of the
adjustment on the side of benefits.78 That is, it
seems likely that the optimal size of a social
security system relative to the economy varies
with the same factors that affect actuarial
balance.
Relying on fully automatic adjustment
rather than assuming there will be periodic
new legislation bears some similarity to a
familiar distinction from macroeconomicsrules
vs. discretion for monetary policy. Parallel
issues include the concern about setting rules
without fully knowing how the economy adjusts
to the policy actions and recognition that the
economy may evolve so that currently good
rules may become less so in the future. But
there are also different issues. Social Security
set up for the indefinite future involves a level
of detail complexity that seems higher than setting
rules for the Fed. Moreover, Congress
could invite the Fed to set out a rule it will then
follow. Thus we need to ask whether Congress
would do a better job in setting out rules once
and for all rather than adjusting them from time
to time. While legislating from time to time is
an inherently easier intellectual problem, we
need to be concerned about the asymmetries in
the political ease of legislation addressing surpluses
and deficits, an asymmetry that is reduced
by legislating automatic adjustments.
Also there may be more similarity across the
77 With this approach, Social Security would become  fully specified and so easier to analyze and more in keeping  with Arrow-Debreu thinking. But, making it easier to ana-  lyze does not necessarily make it better. Just as mathemat-  ical convenience, for example from additive preferences,  while convenient for theoretical analysis, does not neces-  sarily add to empirical reliability.  78 If the tax rate is thought to be too high and politically  can not be lowered, then doing the adaptation to anticipated  higher cost outcomes fully in terms of lower benefits may  make sense as a political fallback. I, for one, do not think the  current tax rate and replacement rates in the United States
are too high.  political spectrum in normative evaluations of
the impacts of monetary policy than of the evaluations
of the sizes of taxes and benefits for
different workers and family structures. As with
monetary policy, I think that some discretion
can improve outcomes.
In considering possible automatic adjustments,
one can look at how adjustment is currently
debated and how it was done before. In
our last major reform in 1983, there was an
explicit sense of balancing benefit and revenue
changes (Paul C. Light, 1985). Currently, we
view both benefit reductions and tax revenue
increases as candidates to contribute to restoring
a projected position of financial balance. The
Commission appointed by President Bush put
forth two plans which restored actuarial balance
(Commission to Strengthen Social Security,
2002). One of them included new dedicated
revenues, and both of them included large transfers
of general revenues, which one cannot help
but think of as in large part coming from new
revenues and not just spending decreases and
certainly not benefit decreases. The plan that
Orszag and I have put forth explicitly divides
some of the proposed changes for restoring actuarial
balance (both one-time changes and new
automatic changes) between revenue changes
and benefit changes.
A. Fully Funded Defined Contribution and
Partially Funded Defined Benefit
The parallel to the workings of the ArrowDebreu
model and the completeness of the specification
makes economists more comfortable
thinking in terms of mandated fully funded defined
contribution systems than the type of partially
funded defined benefit system we have.
So, I want to draw out some comparisons. One
is that portfolio risk in a mandatory fully funded
defined contribution system is highly correlated
with the portfolio risk of the rest of individual
retirement savings. Thus the increased use of
defined contribution private pensions raises the
value of a defined benefit Social Security system
relative to individual accounts.79 In contrast, a
79 Social Security needs to be considered in the context  of all retirement income provision, not just by itself, recog-  nizing the great diversity in the extent to which people have  private sources of retirement income. The Social Security  reform debate has recognized non-Social Security retirement
VOL. 94 NO. 1
21