and persuading themselves that they are system-
atically lucky or unlucky in handling market
risk.
Another important memory effect is subjec-
tive time. You all know the canard, "Time flies
when you are having fun." We have trouble
keeping time scales straight in our memories.
We telescope time, so past events seem more
recent than they actually were. We are unsuc-
cessful in integrating sensation over time. In a
phenomenon studied by Daniel Kahneman,
Alan Krueger, and others (Kahneman and
Krueger, forthcoming; Donald C. Redelmeier
and Kahneman, 1996), episodes of pleasure or
pain are remembered selectively in terms of
peak and most recent sensation. This can lead
consumers to choices that "remember" better
than they "experience." There is a relationship
between subjective time and brain structure--
current sensation is recorded in the limbic sys-
tem and its reward pathways, memory of past
and anticipation of future sensations are proc-
essed in the cerebrum, more analytic and less
colorful. David Laibson and colleagues have
studied this as the physiological explanation for
hyperbolic discounting (Fehr, 2001; Laibson,
2005; Laibson et al., 2005). A final comment is
that subjective time is not a new element in
explaining consumers' sensations and behavior.
Francis Y. Edgeworth (1881) proposed, follow-
ing William S. Jevons (1871), that the same
objective time may correspond to different rates
of thought and feeling in different periods, so that
the utility of an experience will be the subjective
time integral of the sensations involved.
Perceptions and beliefs are influenced by the
way we process information (see Table 2).
Memory plays a role, e.g., selective memory is  implicated in regression and representativeness
effects. We overemphasize recent, available ex-
perience in forming beliefs, and depend heavily
on readily available cues to construct our per-
ceptions when we need them to make choices.
In experiments, consumers are often influ-
enced by the context and framing of perceptual
tasks and choices, and anchor their perceptions
to cues contained in the choice task. Anchoring
affects statements of willingness to pay (WTP)
for public goods obtained by direct elicitation
when consumers have incompletely articulated
tastes for these goods (see Green et al., 1998).
In addition, anchoring distorts responses to fac-
tual questions in surveys. Beyond this, why
should economists be interested? The answer is
that anchoring effects appear clearly in market
transactions involving complex commodities.
For example, houses and automobiles are typi-
cally sold by bargaining, starting from an initial
listing price or manufacturer's suggested retail
price. Field experiments with real estate agents
show that manipulation of initial offers can in-
fluence bargaining outcomes. A study by Itamar
Simonson and Amos Tversky (1992) finds that
when products are positioned so that one ap-
pears to be a bargain, a form of anchoring, then
consumers will flock to the apparent bargain
alternative. When I told a friend who owns a
Boston seafood restaurant that he could use this
result to reposition his wine list and increase his
profits, his response was "tell me something I
didn't learn in hotel school."
Anchoring is one example of how consumers
may be influenced by context and framing that
should be irrelevant to choice. A second impor-
tant example is the endowment effect, also
called a reference point or status quo effect, in