WlAS will make it possible to control for the
effect of wartime stress by comparing subsequent
morbidity and mortality among those who
served in the Union Arny with relatives who
did not. It will also be possible to measure family
effects on aging and mortality experience. This
will be done by including parents' occupation,
wealth, residential history, number of children,
place or region of birth, and migration histoiy.
Brothers in ILAS share a common prewar environment
as well as a common genetic heritage.
They may also share a common war experience
(see D. S. Lauderdale and P. J. Rathouz, 1998).
This common genetic heritage and environment
is not fully captured by the aforementioned intergenerational
variables because heritability is
composed of the many different dimensions included
in genetics and environment. However,
conmmon family effects may be measured by using
independent variables to "sweep out" the
effects of observed variables on death age. The
covariance of the errors in that regression with
brothers' estimated death ages is then a measure
of the common family effect on death age. As
an alternative to the residual-covariance approach,
a kiindred-frallty model (Vaupel, 1990)
could be used where brothers share a level of
frailty. Then, with assumptions about the structure
of the frailty distribution, the parameters of
a hazard function and a frailty distribution could
be estimated (cf., James J. Heckman and
Christopher R. Taber, 1994).
IV. The Production and Distribution
of Spiritual Assets

There is, finally, the issue of spiritual or immaterial
assets. A good place to begin is with
Socrates' question: What is the good life? That
was a critical question not only for the sons of
rich Athenians but for sons of the landed rich
throughout history. Freed of the need to work
in order to satisfy their material needs, they
sought self-realization in public service, military
adventures, philanthropy, the arts, theology,
ethics, and moral philosophy. Their
preoccupation with immaterial commodities
led Adam Smith to argue that the landed aristocracy
ignored their property and lacked interest
in advancing methods of cultivation.
"The situation of such a person," he wrote,
"naturally disposes him to attend rather to ornamenit
which please his fancy, than to profit
for which he has so little occasion" (Smith,
1937 pp. 364, 891-892).

In a world in which all but a small percenitage
are lacking in adequate nutrition and other
necessities of life, self-realization may indeed
seem like a mere ornanent, but not in a country
where even the poor are rich by past or
Third World standards. That is the case in
America today since the poverty line is at a
level of real income that was attained by only
those in the top 10 percent of the income distribution
a century ago'3 (Fogel, 2000). Technophysio
evolution has made it possible to
extend the quest for self-realization from a
minute fraction of the population to almost the
whole of it. Although those who are retired
will have more time to pursue self-realization,
even those still in the labor force will have
sufficient leisure to seek it either within their
professional occupations or outside of them
(Peter Laslett, 1991; Hans Lenk, 1994),
Some proponents of egalitarianism insist
on characterizing the material level of the
poor today as being harsh. They confound
current and past conditions of living. Failure
to recognize the enormous material gains
over the last century, even for the poor, impedes
rather than advances the struggle
against chronic poverty in rich nations, the
principal characteristic of which is spiritual
estrangement from the mainstream society.
Although material assistance is an important
element in the struggle to overcome spiritual
estrangement, such assistance will not be
properly targeted if one assumes that iinprovement
in material conditions naturally
leads to spiritual improvement.
That proposition, so widely emnbraced by the
nore secular of the economic reformers of the
twentieth century, did more to promote the
consumerism of the 1920's and 1930's than to
produce spiritual regeneration. The middle and
working classes became preoccupied with the
acquisition of automobiles and those household
appliances made possible by electricity: