control its sources of capital? Or that its
persuasion of the consumer joined with the
similar effort of other firms and with the
more than incidental blessing of neoclassical
pedagogy helps establish the values
of the community, notably the association
between well-being and the progressively
increased consumption of the products of
this part of the economy?
And as citizens, if not as scholars, we
would not deny that the modern corporation
has a compelling position in the
modern state. What it needs in research
and development, technically qualified
people, public works, emergency financial
support, becomes public policy. So does the
military procurement that sustains the
demand for numerous of its products. So,
perhaps, does the foreign policy that
justifies the military procurement. And
the means by which this power is brought
to bear on the state is widely accepted. It
requires an organization to deal with an
organization. And between public and
private bureaucracies between GM and
the Department of Transportation, General
Dynamics and the Pentagon there is
a deeply symbiotic relationship. Each of
these organizations can do much for the
other. There is even, between them, a
large and continuous interchange of executive
personnel.

Finally over this exercise of power and
much enhancing it is the rich gloss of
reputability. The men who guide the
modern corporation, including the financial,
legal, technical, advertising, and other
sacerdotal authorities in corporate function,
are the most respectable, affluent,
and prestigious members of the national
community. They are the Establishment.
Their interest tends to become the public
interest. It is an interest that even some
economists find it comfortable and rewarding
to avow.

That interest, needless to say, is profoundly
concerned with power with wining
acceptance by others of the collective
or corporate purpose. It does not disavow
profits. These are important for ensuring
the autonomy of the management what
I have called the technostructure and for
bringing the supply of capital within the
control of the firm. Profits are also a
source of prestige and therewith of influence.
But of paramount importance is the
much more directly political goal of
growth. Such growth carries a strong economic
reward; it directly enhances the
pay, perquisites, and opportunities for
promotion of the members of the technostructure.
And it consolidates and enhances
authority. It does this for the individualfor
the man who now heads a larger
organization or a larger part of an organization
than before. And it increases the
influence of the corporation as a whole.
Neoclassical economics is not without an
instinct for survival. It rightly sees the
unmanaged sovereignty of the consumer,
the ultimate sovereignty of the citizen and
the maximization of profits and resulting
subordination of the firm to the market
as the three legs of a tripod on which it
stands. These are what exclude the role of
power in the system. All three propositions
tax the capacity for belief. That the
modern consumer is the object of a massive
management effort by the producer is not
readily denied. The methods of such management,
by their nature, are embarrassingly
visible. It can only be argued that
somehow it all cancels out. Elections in
the United States and Canada are now
being fought on the issue of the subordination
of the state to corporate interest. As
voters, economists accept the validity of
the issue. Only their teaching denies it.
But the commitment of the modern corporate
bureaucracy to its expansion is, perhaps,
the clearest of all. That the modern
conglomerate always pursues profit over
aggrandizement is believed by none. It is a
commonplace of these last years, strongly