inely usable, empirically validated theory and
we are studying a process that generates very
limited data relating outcomes to underlying
factors.66
Incomplete specification is not a necessary
part of a mandatory social security system. For
example, in Chile workers are required to save
10 percent of covered earnings in mutual funds,
using the accumulation for an annuity purchase
or phased withdrawals after reaching benefit
eligibility. Thus the workings of the system are
fully specified in terms of economic out-
comes. 7 This does not imply that the Chilean
government will never change the rules of the
system. Indeed, it has made frequent changes in
some details. But it does mean that we can
analyze the outcomes of the current system un-
der the assumption of no further legislation
without being internally inconsistent. We can-
not do that for the United States-there are
states of nature that require some legislative
change, indeed the probability of such a future
need is very high today.
The Chilean approach of a fully funded de-
fined contribution system is not the only way to
have a fully specified system. Sweden has one
too. In Sweden, the payroll tax rate is 18.5
percent. While 2.5 percent of payroll goes into
fully funded individual accounts, 16 percent is
used for a partially funded system, called a
notional defined contribution system (NDC).
An NDC system mimics a fully funded de-
fined contribution system in that it accumu-
lates a notional balance for each worker that
increases each year by taxes paid and a no-
tional interest rate.68 At retirement, this bal-
ance is converted into an annuity based on the

life expectancy of that cohort and the same  notional interest rate.69 The notional interest
rate is set administratively (with automatic
adjustment), not by returns realized on assets
held. In this way an NDC system mimics a
defined benefit system. Thus it is very much a
hybrid. Whether this system is referred to as a
defined benefit system or an unfunded defined
contribution system matters since the vocab-
ulary with which a system is described can
influence the politics of both creation and
adaptation.
By itself a well-structured NDC system, with
a decent size buffer stock of assets, will have
little probability of needing legislative interven-
tion as long as economic growth is large
enough. Even so, the Swedes have gone further
by introducing an automatic balancing system. I
will not digress to describe the Swedish auto-
matic balance rules. It suffices to say that if
economic growth is sufficiently slow, the no-
tional interest rate is automatically lowered-
reducing both benefits in payment and future
benefits in response to this slower rate of
growth. Thus the Swedish system can be ana-
lyzed for an indefinite future without an as-
sumption about the structure of future
legislation, so one does not need a fully funded
system to have that property. Sweden, like
Chile, puts all of the risk of future outcomes on
the side of benefits and none on the side of
taxes.70
Some simple ways for pretty much ensuring
automatic balance can illustrate alternative ap-
proaches. In the French and German pension
systems, workers accumulate "points" based on
earnings that have been subject to tax. Think of
this as a sum of wage-indexed wages over a
worker's career. The accumulations of points
determine relative pensions for retirees. Un-
like what is actually done in France and Ger-
many, points could be converted into cash
benefits by automatically adjusting the value
of a point to exhaust available revenues. Con-
versely, we could think of adjusting the tax