THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
measurement questions and goes directly to an
estimation of the importance of nominal shocks
in general, those we know how to measure and
those we do not, whatever they may be.
A second reason for preferring the procedure
Shapiro and Watson used is that the effects of
nominal shocks as they estimate them include
the effects of real shocks that could have been
offset by monetary policy but were not. Whatever
it is that keeps prices from rising in proportion
to a given increase in money must also
keep relative prices from adjusting as neoclassical
theory would predict they should to, say,
an increase in the OPEC-set price of oil. Effects
of either kind-those initiated by monetary
changes and those initiated by real shocks-will
last only as long as the rigidity or glitch that
gives rise to them lasts, vanishing in the long
run, and will be identified as arising from the
"nominal," or "demand," shock under the Shapiro
and Watson identification procedure. Thus
I want to interpret the estimates in columns 2
and 3 of Table 1 as upper bounds on the variance
that could have been removed from output
and hours at different horizons under some
monetary policy other than the one actually
pursued. The table gives no information on
what this variance-minimizing monetary policy
might have been, and there is no presumption
that it would have been a policy that does not
respond to real shocks.
Shapiro and Watson applied the theoretical
idea that nominal shocks should be neutral in
the long run to obtain an estimate of the fraction
of short-run output variability that can be attributed
to such shocks. Prescott (1986a) proceeded
in a quite different way to arrive at an estimate
of the fraction of output variability that can be
attributed to technology shocks. He used actual
Solow residuals to estimate the variance and
serial correlation of the underlying technology
shocks. Feeding shocks with these properties
into a fully calibrated real-business-cycle model
resulted in output variability that was about 84
percent of actual variability.9 In a complementary
study, S. Rao Aiyagari (1994) arrived at an
estimate of 79 percent for the contribution of
9 Questions of measurement errors are discussed in the
paper and by Summers (1986) in the same volume. In
Prescott (1986b), estimates of 0.5 to 0.75 for the contribu-
tion of technology shocks to output variance are proposed.
technology shocks, based on comovements of
production and labor input over the cycle.
Shapiro and Watson find that at most 30
percent of cyclical output variability can be
attributed to nominal shocks. Working from the
opposite direction, Prescott and Aiyagari conclude
that at least 75 percent of cyclical output
variability must be due to technology shocks.
These findings are not as consistent as they may
appear, because there are important real factors
besides technological shocks-shocks to the tax
system, to the terms of trade, to household technology,
or to preferences-that are cyclically
important but not captured in either of the categories
I have considered so far.l? Even so, on
the basis of this evidence I find it hard to imagine
that more than 30 percent of the cyclical
variability observed in the postwar United
States could or should be removed by changes
in the way monetary and fiscal policy is
conducted.
IV. Risk Aversion
The estimate of the potential gains from stabilization
reviewed in Section II rests on assumed
consumer preferences of the constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA) family, using but
two parameters-the subjective discount rate p
and the risk-aversion coefficient y-to characterize
all households. This preference family is
almost universally used in macroeconomic and
public finance applications. The familiar formula
for an economy's average return on capital
under CRRA preferences,
(6) r = p + yg,
where g is the growth rate of consumption,
makes it clear why fairly low 3y values must be
used. Per capita consumption growth in the
United States is about 0.02 and the after-tax
return on capital is around 0.05, so the fact that
p must be positive requires that y in (6) be at
most 2.5. Moreover, a value as high as 2.5
would imply much larger interest rate differenlO
For example, Shapiro and Watson attribute a large
share of output variance to a shock which they call "labor
supply" [and which I would call "household technology,"
following Jess Benhabib et al. (1991) and Jeremy
Greenwood and Zvi Hercowitz (1991)].
6
MARCH 2003