that represent a claim on those real assets.) However,
the initial generation of retirees had the good
fortune to receive benefits without ever having
paid taxes.
It can be shown that aggregating the consumption
losses of all generations of taxpayers back to
the initial date using a discount rate equal to the
marginal product of capital produces a present
value loss just equal to the windfall gain of the
initial retirees. (Feldstein and Liebman, 2002a;
Feldstein, 2005b) In short, with these simplified
"textbook" assumptions, the introduction of a payas-
you-go Social Security program does not reduce
the present value of national consumption
but rather redistributes it from later generations to
the first one. More generally, whenever the program
is expanded, those who are about to retire or
who will soon retire receive a windfall gain at the
expense of all future generations but with no
change in the present value of consumption over
all generations.
This neutrality result depends, however, on the
implicit assumption that there are no distorting
capital income taxes.17 With capital taxes, the
appropriate intra-generational rate of discount of
consumption is less than the marginal product of
capital. Moreover, the appropriate rate for aggregating
the consumption of different future generations
may not be a market rate at all but a
discount rate equal to the rate of decline in the
marginal utility of consumption. With a realistic
growth rate and any plausible value of the elasticity
of marginal utility with respect to consumption,
the appropriate rate of discount would be far
less than the marginal product of capital.'8 With
that discount rate, the net present value of the loss
of consumption due to introducing and then repeatedly
expanding a pay-as-you-go Social Security
would be very large. Similarly, shifting from
a pure pay-as-you-go program to a mixed program
with a substantial investment-based portion would
cause a large rise in the present value of
consumption.
The reduction in saving and in the present
value of consumption is not the only adverse  effect of a pay-as-you-go program. A second
important effect is the distortion of labor supply
and of the form in which compensation is paid
because of the increase in the marginal tax rate.
The relevant marginal tax rate is the statutory
rate net of the anticipated increase in the actuarial
value of benefits. The increase in benefits
is zero for many married women. It is also zero
for individuals who are not in one of their 35
highest earning years, typically when they are
either young or old, so that the higher effective
marginal tax rate comes when the individual's
attachment to work is relatively weak. Many
individuals may also underestimate the effect of
additional earnings on future benefits. In all of
these cases, the payroll tax may create a substantial
deadweight burden.
This incremental deadweight loss from distorting
the labor supply would be essentially
eliminated if individuals earned a market return
on their Social Security savings, as they would
in an investment-based system. That would
make the actuarial present value of their benefits
equal to their Social Security savings. The only
labor supply distortion would result if some
individuals were forced to do more saving for
retirement than they preferred or thought that
the implicit actuarial terms of the annuity did
not reflect their own mortality risk. A mixed
system that combines pay-as-you-go and investment-
based components would reduce but not
eliminate the labor supply distortion.
A third distortion caused by a traditional payas-
you-go system is the incentive to retire early
when an implicit tax results from the loss of
benefits caused by delayed retirement. Although
the United States has now largely eliminated
this by an appropriate actuarial adjustment, this
distortion remains a major problem in Europe
and elsewhere (Gruber and Wise, 1999). Early
retirement increases the annual cost of Social
Security benefits and reduces the available labor
income tax base. This leads to a higher marginal
rate of Social Security tax, further increasing
that source of deadweight loss. When combined
with formal or informal restrictions that prevent
reducing wages to offset the high payroll tax
rates, these taxes contribute to the high unemployment
rates that we see in Europe. The U.S.
experience shows that this problem can be eliminated
within the pay-as-you-go system. It
would, of course, also be eliminated in an
investment-based system in which retirement  17 For an explicit derivation of the neutrality result and an  examination of the implication of capital income taxes and of  other discount rates, see Feldstein and Liebman (2002a).  18 For example, with a per capita growth rate of two
percent and an elasticity of the marginal utility function of  two percent per year, the rate of decline of the marginal  utility of consumption would be 4 percent.