and that potential entrants find it appropriate
to evaluate the profitability of entry
in terms of the incumbent firms' pre-entry
prices. In short, it is a requirement of contestability
that there be no cost discrimination
against entrants. Absolute freedom of
exit, to us, is one way to guarantee freedom
of entry. By this we mean that any firm can
leave without impediment, and in the process
of departure can recoup any costs incurred
in the entry process. If all capital is salable
or reusable without loss other than that corresponding
to normal user cost and depreciation,
then any risk of entry is eliminated.
Thus, contestable markets may share at
most one attribute with perfect competition.
Their firms need not be small or numerous
or independent in their decision making or
produce homogeneous products. In short, a
perfectly competitive market is necessarily
perfectly contestable, but not vice versa.
The crucial feature of a contestable market
is its vulnerability to hit-and-run entry. Even
a very transient profit opportunity need not
be neglected by a potential entrant, for he
can go in, and, before prices change, collect
his gains and then depart without cost, should
the climate grow hostile.
Shortage of time forces me to deal rather
briefly with two of the most important properties
of contestable markets-their welfare
attributes and the way in which they determine
industry structure. I deal with these
briefly because an intuitive view of the logic
of these parts of the analysis is not difficult
to provide. Then I can devote a bit more
time to some details of the oligopoly and the
intertemporal models.
A. Perfect Contestability and Welfare
The welfare properties of contestable
markets follow almost directly from their
definition and their vulnerability to hit-andrun
incursions. Let me list some of these
properties and discuss them succinctly.
First, a contestable market never offers
more than a normal rate of profit-its economic
profits must be zero or negative, even
if it is oligopolistic or monopolistic. The
reason is simple. Any positive profit means
that a transient entrant can set up business,
replicate a profit-making incumbent's output
at the same cost as his, undercut the incumbent'
s prices slightly and still earn a
profit. That is, continuity and the opportunity
for costless entry and exit guarantee that
an entrant who is content to accept a slightly
lower economic profit can do so by selecting
prices a bit lower than the incumbent's.
In sum, in a perfectly contestable market
any economic profit earned by an incumbent
automatically constitutes an earnings opportunity
for an entrant who will hit and, if
necessary, run (counting his temporary but
supernormal profits on the way to the bank).
Consequently, in contestable markets, zero
profits must characterize any equilibrium,
even under monopoly and oligopoly.
The second welfare characteristic of a contestable
market follows from the same argument
as the first. This second attribute of
any contestable market is the absence of any
sort of inefficiency in production in industry
equilibrium. This is true alike of inefficiency
of allocation of inputs, X-inefficiency, inefficient
operation of the firm, or inefficient
organization of the industry. For any unnecessary
cost, like any abnormal profit, constitutes
an invitation to entry. Of course, in
the short run, as is true under perfect competition,
both profits and waste may be present.
But in the long run, these simply cannot
withstand the threat brandished by potential
entrants who have nothing to lose by grabbing
at any opportunity for profit, however
transient it may be.
A third welfare attribute of any long-run
equilibrium in a contestable market is that
no product can be sold at a price, p, that is
less than its marginal cost. For if some firm
sells y units of output at such a price and
makes a profit in the process, then it is
possible for an entrant to offer to sell a
slightly smaller quantity, y - E, at a price a
shade lower than the incumbent's, and still
make a profit. That is, if the price p is less
than MC, then the sale of y - E units at price
p must yield a total profit X + A7r which is
greater than the profit, va, that can be earned
by selling only y units of output at that price.
Therefore, there must exist a price just
slightly lower than p which enables the entrant
to undercut the incumbent and yet to