occurrence cannot be estimated before the
fact. With respect to changes in labor demand
that are perceived to be consistent
with a previously known distribution, implicit
contract theory predicts either rigid
wages or-in the models like those of Hall
and Lilien and Grossman and Hart-wages
which move less than spot auction markets
would predict but are positively correlated
with the level of employment. But the informal
agreements or generally accepted conventions
that we call implicit contracts must
also provide for changes in circumstances
whose probability cannot rationally be estimated
at the time workers enter into the
contract. These climatic changes in economic
circumstances can be of several broad kinds.
They might involve a relatively long-term
change, because of shifts in demand or costs,
in the rents available to be shared by a firm
and its workers. Long-term changes in the
relative demand and supply of particular
occupations or in particular local labor
markets will also call for changes in relative
wages around a given W.

If the present value of the stream of benefits
to workers (wages and employment probabilities)
flowing from continuing with the
firm begins to decline relative to the alternative
combination of initial investment costs
and future rents that can be generated at
other firms, it is appropriate that contract
terms signal the information to workers, so
that they can make the relevant comparisons,
and decide whether to quit the firm. Similarly,
if a substantial and permanent decline
occurs in the relative demand for labor by
occupation or locality, wages ought to signal
the change. Conversely, economic circumstances
might increase the rents to be divided
making it optimal for the firm to enlarge its
share of the relevant labor market pool of
experienced workers. In that case, the signal
of higher relative wages ought to be transmitted
to attract from other firms or occupations
workers for whom the lost rents are less
than the improved opportunities.
An efficient determination of wages must
thus cope with two hard-to-reconcile sets of
facts. Because long continuity of association
between firms and specific workers confers
substantial benefits on both parties, rentsharing
arrangements that offer protection
against exploitation and promote such continuity
are profitable. But the period of association
is so long that the probability distribution
of circumstances requiring changes
in wages is largely unknowable. And so the
rules and conventions governing wage determination
must be flexible enough to allow
response. Seen in this light, the terms "implicit
contract" may be misleading. It is, I
think, useful to think of wages as being
set and periodically revised by firms within
limits imposed by a set of social conventions,
concepts of equity and fairness, and
informal understandings. These conventions,
concepts, and understandings provide substantial,
if imperfect, protection against exploitation
but allow flexibility to deal with
Knightian uncertainty.

While very lengthy association requires
relative wage adjustments in response to
" unforeseeable" changes in circumstances,
other characteristics of the labor market suggest
that those adjustments will tend to be
gradual and delayed. It would be hard to
account for the long job tenures that we
observe unless the combination of positive
returns to association and the cost of transition
were quite sizeable. The quantitative
evidence on the magnitude of explicit turnover
costs suggests that they are large. Daniel
Mitchell and Larry Kimbell (1982), for example,
report a recent estimate, based on a
survey of Los Angeles firms, that firms' own
costs of turnover (exit costs plus replacement
costs) averaged $3,600, $2,300, and $10,400
for production, clerical, and salary-exempt
workers, respectively.

Under these circumstances, erroneous signals
can have asymmetrical results. Changes
in wages undertaken on the mistaken identification
of a temporary change in circumstances
as a permanent change can cause
a substantial loss to workers and firms from
the unnecessary scrapping of "investment"
and the incurring of other turnover costs.
Entire rent streams are wiped out to the
extent that workers having transferred to
other firms cannot return when the mistake
is discovered. Moreover, once experienced
workers do change jobs, it is likely to take
several tries before they find another longtenure
job. Hall (1982), for example, shows
that in 1978 a worker aged 45-49 who was in