A fourth premise was that the labor force
in developing countries, predominantly engaged
in agricultural activities as it was, had
a marginal product of labor that was "negligible,
zero, or even negative," to quote W.
Arthur Lewis (1954 p. 141). The stylized
"fact" that there was "surplus" labor, or
disguised unemployment in less developed
countries (LDCs) was widely accepted.9 In
many analytical formulations, it was explicitly
or implicitly assumed that labor was a
free good while capital was the scarce factor
of production.'0
Related to the fourth premise was a fifth
premise: that capital accumulation was crucial
for growth, and in early stages of development
it could occur only with the importation of
capital goods. Since it was expected that the
demand for capital goods imports, and imports
of other products used in the production
process, would grow rapidly while foreign
exchange earnings would not, it appeared that
growth could follow only if domestic production
of import-competing goods could expand
rapidly.
Yet a sixth widely accepted premise was
that there was very little response to price
incentives in developing countries: peasants
were "traditional" in their behavior, and
there were "structural" problems within the
economy." '
Based on these stylized facts and premises, it
was a straightforward step to believe that the
process of development was that of industrialization,
by which was essentially meant the
accumulation of capital for investment in manufacturing
industry and related infrastructure.
Moreover, since most manufactured goods were
imported, it seemed to follow logically that, as
stated by Chenery (1958 p. 463) among many
others: "Industrialization consists primarily in
the substitution of domestic production of manufactured
goods for imports."
C. Initial Policies
Policy prescriptions were derived from
these propositions, or stylized facts. Since it
was thought that industrialization was necessary
for development and that free trade would
leave underdeveloped countries specialized in
primary commodity production, it followed
that there had to be investment in new manufacturing
industries whose output would substitute
for imports. Further, it was widely
believed that new industries in poor countries
could not possibly compete with their established
counterparts in the developed world.
Therefore, industry would have to be protected
during its initial phase. Import-substitution
policies therefore became the hallmark of development
strategies for manufacturing and
the underlying rationale for trade policy."2
The case for import substitution was based
both on the premises outlined above and also
on received doctrine: the infant industry argument.
The notion that dynamic considerations
and externalities might imply that an
industry, although economic, would not be established
by private agents had been accepted
by economists as a legitimate exception to the
case for free trade since Hamilton and List."3
tended to demonstrate that at the very least the deterioration
had been much less than was believed. John Spraos
(1980) provided a classic review of the evidence.
9 A modem interpretation would be that there are many
people in developing countries with very low marginal
products of labor. While they are too poor to remain unemployed,
the process of development entails equipping
people with the capabilities (partly through education)
and opportunities to increase their productivity.
' To be sure, all analysts recognized the importance of
increased provision of education and health services. But
for purposes of analyzing trade policy, emphasis was almost
exclusively on investment.
" This gave rise to a great deal of literature based on
"structuralism." According to some, it was the absence
of responsiveness to price that made developing countries
"different." Structuralism was also used as an argument
that inflation was necessary in order to achieve growth.
See Hollis B. Chenery ( 1975) for a fuller description.
2 There were many important subthemes that are not
elaborated here, since they are not essential to the main
argument. It should, however, be noted that there were
many who believed that the situation of developing countries
was "structural" and that marginal changes would
not matter. It was then concluded that a "big push" was
needed, with many new investments simultaneously generating
additional demand and then becoming profitable.
Ragnar Nurkse's ( 1958) "balanced growth" prescription
reflected the same viewpoint.
'" See Robert E. Baldwin's (1969) classic analysis of
the argument, which not only sets up the conditions under
which there might be an infant industry, but also carefully