to individual retirement accounts were
curtailed. Deductible business expense accounts
for meals, travel and entertainment
were limited to 80 percent of outlays. Tax
preferences benefiting defense contractors,
banks, oil companies and other industries
were narrowed. On top of all these changes,
the minimum tax for both individuals and
business was retained and strengthened.
Finally, the individual and corporate tax
rates were cut drastically. Under the individual
income tax, two rates-15 and 28 percent-
were substituted for the earlier schedule
of 14 rates, which rose to a maximum of
50 percent. However, the benefits of the lowest
rates and of the personal exemptions
were phased out for higher income taxpayers
at a 5 percent rate. As a result, the new
individual income tax rate structure has four
brackets, with rates of 15, 28, 33, and 28
percent (see Table 7). The general corporate
rate was cut from 46 percent to 34 percent.
Despite these large rate cuts, the act was
expected to be roughly revenue neutral in
total over the first five years, but to shift
about $25 billion of tax annually from individuals
to corporations.
The distributional effect of the 1986 act is
distinctly progressive, especially if the increase
in corporate tax liabilities is taken
into account. I have calculated the change in
average effective tax rates of the nation's
families on the basis of the distribution of
income estimated from the Brookings
MERGE file (Table 5). Total federal tax
burdens decline in the lower nine deciles and
rise in the top decile. In the lower deciles,
the tax reductions result from increases in
the personal exemptions, standard deduction,
and the earned income credit under the
individual income tax. The increases at the
top reflect the broadened individual income
tax base, as well as the increase in corporate
tax liability, which is assumed to fall on
owners of capital in these calculations. However,
as already noted, this increase in progressivity
only partially reversed the reductions
that had taken place in the 1970s and
early 1980s.
The Unfinished Agenda. Despite the progress
made in 1986, the federal income tax in
TABLE 5-CHANGES IN INDIVIDUAL AND CORPORATE
INCOME TAX LIABILITIES UNDER THE TAX REFORM
ACT OF 1986, BY POPULATION PERCENTILE, 1988
Percent Change in
Federal Individual Total
Population and Corporate Federal
Percentilea Income Taxesb Taxes
lst decile -44 -16
2nd decile - 32 -11
3rd decile -24 -10
4th decile -16 - 7
5th decile -12 -6
6th decile - 8 -4
7th decile - 7 - 4
8th decile - 6 - 3
9th decile - 6 - 4
10th decile + 3 + 2
Top 5 Percent +4 +3
Top 1 Percent + 5 + 5
Source: Brookings MERGE file.
aThe classification is by a comprehensive definition
of income, including imputed rent and corporate earnings
allocated to stockholders, whether distributed or
not. 'Assumes the corporate tax is on capital in general.
the United States falls considerably short of
the comprehensive income target.40 I assume
that we shall continue to tax capital gains on
a realization, rather than accrual, basis, and
that gifts and bequests will be taxed under a
separate transfer tax. Nevertheless, a great
deal more could be done to broaden the tax
base for equity, efficiency, and revenue reasons.

The personal exemptions, standard deductions,
and rate bracket limits are adjusted
annually for inflation, but the tax base is
not. Of the two types of adjustment, adjustment
of the tax base would be by far the
more important. Perhaps the major reason
why the income tax tends to be in disrepute
is the discrimination against capital income
inherent in a nominal income tax. An inflation
adjustment of asset prices should be
40For a detailed analysis of a comprehensive income
tax base, see Pechman (1977). Estimates of the revenue
effects of specific changes in the tax base needed to
reach the comprehensive base are given in Congressional
Budget Office (1989).