reduced- the joint result of rising average
incomes, and extended insurance and welfare
provision. Partly because government
was bigger, partly because the scope of progressive
taxation was wider, partly because
of old age and unemployment insurance and
other forms of income maintenance, we
enjoyed the benefits of a system of "built-in
stabilizers." Recessions were milder and
growth more steady than they had ever been
before in American experience as an
industrialized country.
The main point, however, is that in this
period, productivity growth paid easily for
the pursuit of other welfare goals. Although
government grew faster than GNP, fast
growth of productivity supported fast growth
of per capita disposable income, of real
spendable earnings of workers, and of average
family incomes.3 Productivity growth
was, therefore, the substantial basis on which
the consensus of opinion supporting the
development of the mixed economy rested.
III
Frank Knight liked to say that progress is
not a question of happiness; it is a question
of what people are unhappy about. Not
surprisingly, therefore, the progress of the
first two postwar decades was followed by a
certain recoil from growth-a reordering, if
not reversal, of priorities. This took several
forms:
1) Whereas in the 1950's, measured growth
was regarded as the main instrument for
overcoming poverty, as the 1960's wore on
the view took hold, with much justification,
that future growth alone could not deal adequately
with the poverty which past growth
had left behind. Although technical progress,
capital accumulation, and general education
would continue to be important in
the future, an increasing proportion of the
"residual poor" had special handicaps. They
had to be helped directly, principally by a
fight against discrimination, by special education
and training programs, and by new
and expanded schemes for social insurance,
income support, health care programs, and
other transfers in kind. The impulse to fight
poverty directly was fed by new information
about the size and composition of the remaining
poor population, by the indignation
of social reformers and, most of all, by
rising racial tensions.4 "We cannot," said
the Council of Economic Advisors, "leave
the further wearing away of poverty solely
to the general progress of the economy"
(1964, p. 60).5
2) As individual income levels rose, people
generally became more sensitive to their
immediate surroundings. They found hospital
and educational facilities inadequate
and the urban physical plant shabby. Yet
the demand for improvement had to be met
in difficult circumstances which continue to
plague and torment local government to this
day. The relative price of public, like that of
private, services was rising. Higher incomes
and automobiles were transporting upwardly
mobile families to the suburbs, carrying
their tax base with them. The cities,
increasingly abandoned to the poor, unable
to tap the suburban affluence about them,
could barely cope. Congestion on the highways
and streets, noise, air and water pollution,
all fed by growth itself, swelled, moved
to the countryside and everywhere became
more objectionable to otherwise more affluent
people.
3) People discovered the terrors of technology-
products, working conditions, and
environmental changes that carried risks.
The dangers feared were often invisible, they
operated at a distance and cumulated over
time, carrying both real and imaginary
threats to health and life now and in generations
to come. Technological progress, which
for decades had been seen as the process by
which problems and dangers might be overcome,
was now increasingly feared as a
major source of our troubles.
These shifts in outlook had two important
practical consequences. One was the very
3See Appendix Table 2.  4See the articles by Michael Harrington and John  Kenneth Galbraith reprinted in Burton Weisbrod (pp.
29-42 and 49-56, respectively).
5Compare ch. 2 passim, Economic Report of the
President (1964).