change in the right direction or is not responding
to the signals it receives. My own
belief in this case lies with the marketfailure
side. That is to say, I believe that
what looks like involuntary unemployment
is involuntary unemployment.
Of course that conclusion only leads to
another question. If the labor market often
fails to clear, we had better figure out why.
There is no shortage of candidate hypotheses.
Here I think it is worthwhile to insist on
a commonplace: although it is natural for
academic people to seek a single weighty
Answer to a weighty Question, if only because
it is so satisfying to find one, it is
quite likely that many of the candidate hypotheses
are true, each contributing a little
to the explanation of labor-market failure.
Now the second general point I want to
make is one that I am surprised to hear
myself making. While I find several of the
candidate hypotheses entirely believable, I
am inclined to emphasize some that might
be described as noneconomic. More precisely,
I suspect that the labor market is a
little different from other markets, in the
sense that the objectives of the participants
are not always the ones we normally impute
to economic agents, and some of the constraints
by which they feel themselves
bound are not always the conventional constraints.
In other words, I think that among
the reasons why market-clearing wage rates
do not establish themselves easily and adjust
quickly to changing conditions are some
that could be described as social conventions,
or principles of appropriate behavior,
whose source is not entirely individualistic.
I said that I am a little surprised at myself.
That is because I am generally stodgy
about assumptions, and like to stay as close
to the mainstream framework as the problem
at hand will allow. In any case, I think
that the unconventional elements in what I
have to say are only part of the story. And I
assure you that I am not about to peddle
amateur sociology to a captive audience. All
I do mean to suggest is that we may predispose
ourselves to misunderstand important
aspects of unemployment if we insist on
modelling the buying and selling of labor
within a set of background assumptions
whose main merit is that they are very well
adapted to models of the buying and selling
of cloth. Far from advocating that we all
practice sociology, I am pleasantly impressed
at how much mileage you can get
from the methods of conventional economic
analysis if only you are willing to broaden
the assumptions a little.
I

It might be interesting to have a history of
the evolution of economic ideas about unemployment,
and their relation both to the
internal logic of the subject and to the
parallel evolution of the institutions of the
labor market. I am not sufficiently well read
to provide that kind of survey. To make my
point about the persistence of the marketefficiency
market-failure tension, I took a
short cut. I went back to reread Pigou's
Lapses from Full Employment, a little book I
remember having been assigned to read as a
student just after the war. And that in turn
sent me back to its parent book, Pigou's
Theory of Unemployment. The Preface to
The Theory of Unemployment is dated April
1933, after a decade of poor performance
and relatively high unemployment in Great
Britain, well into the Great Depression, and
before the publication of the General Theory.
The Preface to Lapses from Full Employment
(another example of a revealing
vocabulary) is dated November 1944, after
five years of the war that put an end to the
depression, and well after the appearance of
the General Theory. That seemed like an
interesting approach to the historical question,
because current controversies in
macro-economic theory are often described
as a debate between "Keynesians" and
others- "monetarists," "Classicals," or
" equilibrium theorists" - and because
Pigou, besides being a great economist, was
in particular the embodiment of the
Marshallian tradition, the leading figure in
the "classical economics" that the Keynesian
revolution was explicitly intended to
overthrow.

Lapses makes interesting rereading. It emphasizes
the money wage, whereas its predecessor