trained minds have been drawn into economics
in response not just to challenging
policy problems but to the quantitative
revolution since World War II. And part
of it is that the participants can draw on a
hard core of economic theory and methodology,
together with a growing body of
empirical knowledge, to provide standards
for testing the validity (though not necessarily
the relevance and reality) of ideas,
analysis, and empirical findings. The result
is not only a relentless intellectual
policing of the profession that soon exposes
the fool, the quack, and the charlatan, but
a growing capacity "to participate in adversary
debate over public policy issues
without jeopardizing scientific integrity
and freedom" (Johnson (1973)).
That brings me to the second point, the
impression we give outsiders of a house
divided, not to say splintered. It is worth
reminding ourselves and our critics of
several factors that drive a wedge between
image and reality.

One, instead of laying aside our differences
and living contentedly together, we
economists tend to lay aside our agreements
and live contentiously together. We
focus our private and public debates on
unsolved policy problems, tough analytical
nuts, and issues on which we have rival
theories, contradictory evidence, or strong
ideological differences. Just as these are
the questions that intrigue us, they are
the ones that attract the attention of press
and public. What we know-and they may
not is that beneath the visible tip of disagreement
and rivalry lies no huge iceberg
of divisiveness.

Two, it is only occasionally that our
areas of consensus are brought to the surface
in a newsworthy way. One such occasion
was the White House "summit conference"
on inflation last September. Two
dozen leading economists from across a
wide spectrum of American economics
(not wide enough, the radicals would say)
signed a statement which called on the
President and Congress to eliminate
twenty-two restrictive laws and practices
that inhibit competition, inflate costs, and
prop up prices. Only a tiny minority held
out (if any minority that includes Galbraith
can be called "tiny"). Even more
striking, in a sense, was that while the
customary and largely ideological clashes
among, say, Galbraith, Milton Friedman,
and Paul Samuelson caught the public
eye, the real story lay in the minimal dissent
among the participants on (a) the
forecast of a soggy or sagging economy,
(b) the urgency of providing relief to the
victims of inflation and the casualties of
recession, (c) the need to ease monetary
restraint, (d) the small anti-inflationary
payoff on moderate ($5 to $10 billion)
budget cuts, and (e) the advisability of
resisting popular demands for reimposing
full-scale wage and price controls.
Three, even where disagreement flourishes
most visibly, perhaps, between
Keynesians and monetarists-the public
may not discern that the analytical and
empirical ties that bind us are far stronger
than the forces that divide us. Our controversies
take place within the context of
basic consensus on the nature and methods
of economic theory and inquiry, on the
content of the disagreement, and on the
kinds of tests that may one day resolve the
conflict. "Such disagreement within agreement
lies at the heart of the process of
normal development of a science" (Benjamin
Ward, p. 12).

Four, much of what the public perceives
as a clash of economic concepts and findings
is in fact a clash of ideology and
values. Given the way technical economics
and ethical preferences are packaged in
policy debates (and given our lapses in
identifying which is which), this is hardly
surprising. Thus, whoever opens the package
labeled "monetarist" typically finds
not just money supply in full flower, but a