is observed for the comparison of
1957-1966 with 1948-1957.25 Kendrick's
published series end with estimated values
for 1957, but I made use of his somewhat
revised figure for 1957 and of his figures for
later years, i.e., of unpublished data he
kindly let me see, though with emphasis
on their preliminary character.
Thus, from the period 1929-1948 to the
present, the rate of increase of productivity
has risen by about 20 percent of itself; or
by about 30 percent, if the effects of the
intergroup shifts are excluded from the
productivity-increase. From the opening
decades of the century to the present, the
rate of productivity-increase has risen by
about 60 percent (a figure which becomes
75 percent with exclusion of the intergroup
shifts) .26
Indications of a rising tendency of the
rate of productivity-increase are consistent,
though the rise is small as compared
to the rise of the recorded progress-generating
inputs, particularly of R & D, in
relation to output. The discrepancy becomes
significantly reduced by reasonable
allowance for progress-inputs that are not
recorded as such.
IV. The Framework for Productivity and
Benefit Measurement: How Serious
are its Pitfalls?
1. Using the All-Inclusive Cost-Base Requires
a Deduction on the Productivity-Side.
We start with a pitfall for the avoidance
of which a definite prescription can be
given. If we say, as we do when using our
all-inclusive cost-base, that productivityincreases
cost us inter alia the inputs
needed for increased per capita education,
then we are implying that on the benefitside
the bulk of this particular cost must
be deducted from the productivity-increases.
The reason is that a once-attained
higher level of per capita education must
subsequently be maintained to keep the
level of knowledge from becoming reduced.
In this regard the characteristics of education
are different from those of R & D or
from those of the costs of changeovers.
What needs to be deducted on the benefit-
side is the "bulk" of the cost that had
been entered for education-not the entire
cost-because we are relating our magnitudes
to output, and constancy per unit of
the population means a gradual reduction
per unit of output. However, on reasonable
quantitative assumptions the "discounted
value" of the difference between these two
growth rates is small, and hence I will
indeed deduct the bulk.27
2. The Embodiment-Disembodiment Issue,
the Quality-Quantity Controversy and the
Importance of "Dimensions of Improvement.
"'
We shall now consider the main problem
of the present section. Our reasoning can
be Dlaced into frameworks of different
25 On this basis the following results are obtained:
from 1900 to 1929 the rise was 1.5 percent (for the subperiod
1919-29: 2.0 percent); from 1929 to 1948 it was
2.0 percent; from 1948-57 it was 2.3 percent; and for the
following nine years 2.6 percent.
26 Dension, who has made an attempt to separate
quantitatively the effect of different sources of growthan
attempt which because of interactions between his
"sources" I am inclined to consider too ambitiousused
his estimates also for explaining what results he
would obtain by a method much more similar to that of
Kendrick and of other investigators. It turns out that
from the period 1909-29 to 1929-47 he would obtain a
45 percent rise of the rate of productivity-increase. See
Edward F. Denison, pp. 148-49.
27 If progress were limited to a brief interval, then
not merely the "bulk" but, for practical purposes, all of
the cost-item entered for increased per-capita education
would have to be deducted on the benefit-side of the
ledger. The increase in per capita output resulting
merely from, say, a 2 percent yearly increase of the
capital-labor ratio "at a given level of technology"
would require a negligible correction of the kind described
in the text. But if we consider a very long sequence
of periods with technological progress and assume,
say a 2 percent yearly increase in per capita output
then, with a 10 percent discount rate, roughly  four-fifths (or a shade less) of the cost-item entered for
increased per capita education should be deducted on  the benefit-side. I will in fact deduct about four-fifths,
with some rounding where this is called for (see fn. 40,  for the calculation of the 1966 and the 1953 yield).