focused on average rates of return and on
"necessary conditions," using what I believe
to be very widely shared assumptions
as to the meaning of low and of high valuation
of controversial nonmarket contributions.

At this point, attention should be directed
at those aspects of our problem
which call for highly subjective judgment.
My illustrations will be found in Appendix
D, which contains observations on significant
structural and allocational problems
within the area of R & D. Prominent
among these problems is that of "concentration"
in several senses of this term. As
for educational policy, it has become all too
obvious that the future of Western civilization
depends on the personal attitudes
millions of individuals will develop to
structural problems belonging in that sector
of the progress-generating activities.
We may now return to our point of departure.
As long as we want to remain on a
level of reasonable objectivity, we can only
try to play into the hands of those who
must make their own value judgments. On
alternative cost-bases it is possible to make
reasonable statements of fairly general
validity on the social profitability of the
progress-generating activities as a whole
and on the trends of this profitability. For
the time being the average social yields
are high on both our cost-bases, very much
higher than 13 percent and 18 percent,
respectively, as was seen. It should of
course not be overlooked that a waiting
period of considerable duration elapses between
some progress-generating inputs and
the onset of their yield. But this is true
only of part of the progress-inputs as we
have defined them. Furthermore, when
comparing these yields with yields from
plhysical capital formation, another lagadjustment
is also needed, and as explained
in Appendix A, this works in the
opposite direction (in favor of the progressinputs)
. We should remember also that
while on the one hand the lag between
progress-inputs and their results would call
for upward revaluation of the inputs in
relation to their results, on the other hand,
earlier progress-inputs have all along been
smaller progress-inputs.
At any event, regardless of what lagadjustment
we make within reason, the
average social rate of return-even the
rate on the all-inclusive cost-base-satisfies
our necessary condition with ease. This
"real rate" is at present much higher than
the marginal rate from physical investment
at a more or less given level of knowledge.
The latter rate should be estimated
at less than 10 percent; a good case can be
made for estimating it at a figure located
in the range between 5 percent and 10 percent.
46 Moreover, the rates on progressinputs
suggested by our analysis are appreciably
higher also than the typical pretax
corporate profit-rates, a fact which is
worth noting even though no comparability
is claimed for our rates of return with
accounting profits.47
46 A rough estimate of the rate in question, which is
obtained by way of multiplying the ratio of yearly output
to the capital stock by the share of reproducible
capital in income, points to less than 10 percent. See
Section II.
47 The published corporate profit rates (which are
related to the book value of equity) are of course private  rather than social rates. This would not make too much
difference if the private rates were rates "at a given
level of technological knowledge" but in reality they
are earned partly on private progress-generating inputs  which do not enter into the book value. Also, in contrast
to our "real" rates these corporate rates are money
rates earned in large part on equity such as has been  paid up or accumulated in much earlier years than those
in which the profits were earned. There are several
further reasons for noncomparability. On balance there
exists a strong presumption that the corporate rates on
book value are considerably higher than the real rates
on physical investment. The published pre-tax profit
rate on the book value of American manufacturing
corporations as a whole has of late been about 20 percent,
and even this is less than the rates of progressreturn
to which our calculations in the text point.
Again with no claim to comparability, it may be added  that the earnings-rate on the market value of Standard
and Poor's common-stock sample (not wholly limited
to manufacturing) is in the neighborhood of 6 percent,