Now, what precisely is the basic difference
between the wheat and the tin markets, on
the one hand, and the gold and the share
markets, on the other, that lets us assume in
the wheat or tin case that rational expectations
will normally stabilize prices and consumption
in the face either of random or of
predictable fluctuations in amounts supplied
or demanded, while in the gold case, there is
often destabilizing speculation?
The difference obviously has nothing to do
with price flexibility and continuous market
clearing; for these are trademarks not only of
the markets for wheat, tin, and pork bellies,
but also for gold (and for General Motors
shares). Rather, the difference is that in the
wheat and similar cases, the response of
quantities produced and/or quantities consumed
to price changes arising from shifts in
supply or demand can be large enough and
prompt enough to begin to move the price
toward its new equilibrium level within a
relevant time period; and that this response
therefore comes to be anticipated by market
participants. This prompt and substantial
stabilizing response of quantities produced
and consumed does not occur-and therefore
it is not expected to occur-in the case
of gold. As a consequence, in the presence of
large inventories, price expectations dominate
price-level determination not only in the short
term, but even in the moderately long term.
The prices so determined are unlikely to
contribute either to the stability of production
or consumption, or to the equality of
production and consumption. They may thus
produce movements in actual inventories, the
price effects of which, however, have only
modest and long-delayed effects in reversing
such movements.
Clearly, wheat and gold are more-or-less
extreme examples of a spectrum of durable
commodities, capable of storage. At the
wheat end of that spectrum, the responses of
amounts produced and consumed to price
changes are strong and prompt. Market participants
come to expect them to occur, and
take actions with respect to inventories that
tend to stabilize prices around their equilibrium
level, including any expected new
equilibrium level. At the gold end of the
spectrum, the responses of amounts produced
and consumed to price changes are
weak and slow, while inventories are very
large.5 Participants in such markets thus cannot
depend on price movements to be quickly
self-limiting. It is therefore not irrational for
some or many of them to speculate on the
direction of intermediate price movements.
Their speculation may often extend and exaggerate
price movements that had some
origin in changed supply or demand conditions.
Or it may extend and exaggerate price
movements caused by some random exogenous
disturbance, or even by the actions of
a few large traders (for example, the Hunts
in silver).
Most commodity markets lie between these
extremes. In such intermediate markets, price
movements may sometimes be-perhaps ordinarily
are-in the direction of a price that
tends fairly quickly to equate production and
consumption. At other times, price movements
may develop a cumulative momentum
in one direction, which can easily overshoot
the current long-run equilibrium price. Occasionally,
moreover, speculation can affect
even the most stable markets; and speculative
fevers can be transmitted from one
market to another.
The years 1971 through 1973 provide a
clear example of such speculation and of
such transmission.6 Coincidental crop failures
in wheat and coarse grains in several of the
main producing countries of the world-at a
time when world stocks were severely depleted-
caused grain prices to soar; this
helped to attract public attention to the then
popular "Club-of-Rome" fantasies of general
resource scarcity, which in turn helped
to transmit the speculative fever to still other
commodities. In a political environment in
which-partly for accidental reasons-macroeconomic
policies in a number of major
countries were unusually permissive, the
speculative rise in commodity prices soon
came to be reflected in wage rates and in-