again (Rivlin (1973)). In spite of some
limitations, the New Jersey experiment
yielded strong evidence that fears of
fatal incentive effects of a negative income
tax were grossly overblown.
Another focus of fruitful thinking relates
to alternative strategies for delivering
social services. The in-cash
versus in-kind choice is a basic one.
Economists are predisposed toward the
in-cash approach on grounds that one
can generally depend on people to follow
their own best interests. But there
are significant exceptions where consumer
sovereignty is limited or specific
goods externalities exist or some explicit
social values take priority.
Out of economics also comes the attempt
to develop "market analogs" to
serve as substitutes for market incentives
in reconciling public with private
interests, decentralized individual decisions
with social goals. Pollution taxes
are a case in point. Performance standards
for teacher pay would be another.
Putting medical insurance programs
on an efficiency-based reimbursement
basis would be a third. The big gap is
in the redesign of incentives and institutions
to guide decentralized government
decision making more systematically
toward the aims of our social
programs (Schultze (1971)). Thus far,
the government, like the economics profession,
is largely in the dark about its
own production function.
Taxation
What strikes an old public finance functionary
as forcibly as any change in the
field of public finance is the way in which
modern thinking has knocked the props
out from under the neat and primitive
theories of tax incidence of a generation
ago. The property tax provides a particularly
instructive case in point. The textbooks
of the 1930's and 1940's told us confidently
that the tax on land (fixed supply)
was capitalized and on dwellings (supplyresponsive)
fell like an excise tax on the
occupant, the consumer of housing services.
The policy lesson was clear: Given
the declining proportion of income spent
on housing services as income rises, the
tax was hopelessly regressive. Today? It is
recognized that the old incidence analysis
was wrong, even on its own terms.
The modern theory of incidence (defined
as the impact on distribution of
private real income) draws on general
equilibrium theory, distinguishes between
sources-of-income and uses-of-income effects,
and disentangles the concepts of
specific, differential, and balanced-budget
incidence. The resulting analysis indicates
that much, of the aggregate burden of the
property tax falls on owners of capital
and hence tends to be progressive and
this progressivity is enhanced by the
particular "excise-type" effects of this
tax (Henry Aaron). In short, error has
been exposed and though the debate is not
over, we are now in transit toward truth.3
It is hard to put down the knee-jerk reaction
that prefixes "property tax" with
"regressive." And it will take some time
before policy makers accept the proposition
that, at the very least, the property
tax is now in the unexpected position of
"innocent until proved guilty." But the
implications for policy are profound.
Economists have long been useful and
influential contributors to the design of the
federal tax structure and of particular
taxes. Again, elementary concepts we now
take for granted-for example, horizontal
versus vertical equity, Richard Musgrave'
s three branches of distribution, al-
3Those who view decisions to locate in a particular
community as a conscious choice of one particular
bundle of public services over others conclude that the
property tax on housing is a benefit tax, a payment for
benefits received.