the response to demand disturbances are roughly
valid, how can they be so grossly inconsistent
with the reduced form estimates?
Attempts at reconciling the two have taken
several directions, which are reviewed in an
article coauthored with Ando (1976). Our main
conclusion, based on simulation techniques, is
that when income is subject to substantial shocks
from many sources other than monetary and
fiscal, so that these variables account for only a
moderate portion of the variations in income (in
the United States, it has been of the order of onehalf
to two-thirds), then the St. Louis reduced
form method yields highly unstable and unreliable
estimates of the true structure of the system
generating the data.
The crucial role of unreliability and instability
has since been confirmed in more recent work of
Daniel O'Neill in his forthcoming thesis. He
shows in the first place that different methods
of estimation yield widely different estimates,
including many which clearly overstate the
expenditure and understate the money multipliers.
He further points out that, given the
unreliability of the estimates resulting from
multicollinearity and large residual variance,
the relevant question to ask is not whether
these estimates differ from those obtained by
structural estimation, but whether the difference
is statistically significant; that is, larger than
could be reasonably accounted for by sampling
fluctuations.
I have carried out this standard statistical test
using as true response coefficients those generated
by the MPS model quoted earlier.2 I find
that, at least when the test is based on the largest
possible sample-the entire post-Korean period
up to the last two very disturbed years-the
difference is totally insignificant when estimation
is in level form (F is less than one) and is
still not significant at the 5 percent level, when in
first differences.
This test resolves the puzzle by showing that
there really is no puzzle: the two alternative estimates
of the expenditure multipliers are not
inconsistent, given the margin of error of the
estimates. It implies that one should accept
whichever of the two estimates is produced by a
more reliable and stable method, and is generally
more sensible. To me, those criteria call, without
question, for adopting the econometric
model estimates. But should there be still some
lingering doubt about this choice, I am happy to
be able to report the results of one final test
which I believe should dispose of the reduced
form estimates-at least for a while. Suppose
the St. Louis estimates of the expenditure multiplier
are closer to God's truth than the estimates
derived through econometric models. Then it
should be the case that if one uses their coefficients
to forecast income beyond the period of
fit, these forecasts should be appreciably better
than those obtained from a forecasting equation
in which the coefficients of the expenditure variable
are set equal to those obtained from econometric
models.
I have carried out this test, comparing a reduced
form equation fitted to the period originally
used at St. Louis, terminating in 1969 (but
reestimated with the lastest revised data) with an
equation in which the coefficients of government
expenditure plus exports were constrained to be
those estimated from the MPS, used in the above
F-test. The results are clear cut: the errors using
the reduced form coefficient are not smaller but
on the average substantially larger than those
using MPS multipliers. For the first four years,
terminating at the end of 1973, the St. Louis
equation produces errors which are distinctly
larger in eight quarters, and smaller in but three,
and its squared error is one-third larger. For the
last two years of turmoil, both equations perform
miserably, though even here the MPS coefficients
perform just a bit better. I have repeated
this test with equations estimated through the
first half of the postwar period, and the results
are, if anything, even more one-sided.
The moral of the story is pretty clear. First,
2For the purpose of the test, coefficients were scaled
down by one-third to allow for certain major biases in
measured government expenditure for present purposes
(mainly the treatment of military procurement on a delivery
rather than work progress basis, and the inclusion of direct
military expenditure abroad).