guesswork (I believe of a plausible kind),
but it may be regarded as a fact that 13
percent and 18 percent understate the
average rate of progress-return by a substantial
margin and this will prove significant
for the present analysis.
The second statement I consider to be
reasonably safe is that the rates of return
show some degree of downward tendency
in the long run (see here also Appendix B).
The qualifications one might want to add
to this statement are not sufficiently
persuasive to arouse much suspicion in the
diagnosis that such a tendency is observable,
though I would not want to assert
that my figures give an accurate idea of
the extent to which a downtrend has manifested
itself. On what I defined as the reduced
cost-base this downward tendency
has been very mild, but it would not
entirely disappear on any cost-base that to
me seems reasonably chosen.
The suggestion of a long-run downward
tendency of the average rate of return is
not misleading, because the long-run increase
of the costs of progress-inputs has
all along exceeded the rise of the productivity-
gains when both are expressed in
relation to the same output-base. In particular,
the approximately constant uptrend
of productivity during the post-war
decades has been associated with increasing
progress-costs even if we consider
merely the costs of the privately financed
progress-inputs. The second half of the
present decade does not fit well into the
pattern, but it is too early to try to interpret
the record of the very recent inflationary
years, not only because the rate of
resource-utilization in the American economy
has risen suddenly but also because
the rate of increase of the progress-inputs
has been tapering off. This tapering off
occurred partly because the rate of increase
of space research tapered off and
then space research reached a peak in 1966;
and partly because even more recently
there also took place anti-inflationary
downward revisions of government programs
(which is not to say that the rate of
increase of R & D might not have declined
even aside from these circumstances).
Consequently it is to early to ask whether
in the mid-sixties the downward tendency
of our benefit-cost ratios was or was not
interrupted, but further productivityincreases
would have to assume a very
unlikely course to invalidate the conclusion
that there did occur some degree of
long-run decline, even with reasonable
allowances for lags.
We should note that the downward
tendency of the progress-yields would be
slightly smaller than our figures suggest if
we assumed a small rise of the rate of
increase of factor productivity from 1953
to 1966. In fact there is valid reason for
assuming a small acceleration of progress
but, as concerns the downward tendency
of the yields, allowance for this would
make little difference, because such a
modification would call at the same time
for a small increase of our charge for the
unrecorded costs.42
42 I assumed a 2.8 percent rate of increase of factor
productivity for the entire period 1948-66. This is in
accordance with the Kendrick estimates when the favorable
productivity-effects of intersector (intergroup)
shifts are included. On this basis there was no increase
from 1948-57 to 1957-66. However, if the effect of these
shifts is excluded, then from 1948-57 to 1957-66 a rise
is observed from a rate of increase of 2.3 percent to a
rate of 2.6 percent. Furthermore, even the first of these
two types of measure of productivity-increase rose from
the period 1929-48 to 1948-66 (it rose from 2.6 percent
to 2.8 percent), and it may be argued that this rise has
resulted in part from the post-1953 increase in progress-
inputs.
When comparing 1966 with 1953 I took no account
of any such increase on the benefit-side of the ledger. I
also used the same percentage allowance in relation to
private GNP for the unrecorded costs of 1966 as for
those of 1953, since there exists a general presumption
that these costs tend to move in proportion to the rate
of progress. During these particular thirteen years there
may conceivably have occurred a somewhat more than
proportionate increase in specific costs appearing in the
list of Appendix C. One may be led to suspect this for
example because of the increase of the white-colla
proportion of the labor force. On the other hand, the