zero. Whether we wish to distinguish the
specific costs of changeovers as a separate
subcategory is a terminological question,
since technological knowledge is not even
truly acquired before it is introduced on
an industrial scale. But at any rate the
changeover-costs belong among the costs
of progress, and they are quantitatively
significanit though they are frequently
overlooked when benefits are weighed
against costs. The costs of progress so conceived
are the costs of those inputs which
in this paper are referred to as "progressgenerating.
" These inputs become combined
with hiuman talent which is no easier
to define and is certainly no less essential
than are the Ricardian "original" and "indestructible"
powers of the soil.

We may express, as a proportion of the
value of a year's output, the cost of the
goods and services representing the progress-
generating input for the year; and on
the benefit-side, we may set against this
cost the proportion in which technological
progress increases the output flow annually.
3 On specific simplifying assumptions,
the progress-induced proportionate
addition to output will remain permanent
and independent of the output-base. With
a deduction on the productivity-side to
allow for the continuing need to keep per
capita education at any once-attained
higher level,4 we then arrive at the ratio of
an economic benefit-stream to cost; and
after multiplying by 100, we obtain a
magnitude that comes close to what the
economist may consider a measure of the
average social rate of return from the
progress-generating activities of the period
in question.6 Such a concept of an average
rate of return can not, of course, guide us
to the core of the ultimately relevant problems
of resource-allocation, but the concept
will nevertheless be found useful.
Even on assumptions assuring constant
proportionate additions to the output-flow
the delayed start of the benefit stream will
subsequently require allowances in the
nature of discounts, yet for reasons explained
in Appendix A and in Section VI,
this difficulty will not prove critical.6 We
will also have to try to get rid of the effect
of cyclical and erratic forces on our yearly
data.

The simlplifying assumptions required for
defining average social rates of return in
terms of constant proportionate additions
to output are indeed specific. But analysis
based on these assumptions has led to
reasonably realistic results in a good many
other respects. I shall make these assumptions
which should assure at least rough
comparability of the benefit-cost ratios so
obtained with analogous ratios for physical
capital formation on a more-or-less given
level of technological knowledge.7 The
"stepping up" of the absolute contribution
of technological progress when future inputs
(other than progress-generating ones)
raise the output-base must not be allowed
to destroy the comparability of progressreturns
with the returns from investment
in the usual sense. This must be watched
in formulating the assumptions needed for
the justification of such comparisons.