stances be proved wrong by the very
methods of science itself. As long as science
is investigating an unchanging world,
however, this problem does not become
acute, for if knowledge does not change
the world, then all ignorance does for us is
to prevent us from satisfying our idle
curiosity. When, however, knowledge
changes the world the question of the content
of the common values, both of the
subculture which is producing knowledge
and of the total society in which that subculture
is embedded, becomes of acute importance.
Under these circumstances the
concept of a value-free science is absurd,
for the whole future of science may well
rest in our ability to resolve the ethical
conflicts which the growth of knowledge is
now creating. Science could create an ethical
dynamic which would bring it to an
end.
Let us return then to economics as a
moral science, not merely in the sense in
which all science is "affected with an ethical
interest," but in the quite specific
sense of asking whether economics itself
can be of assistance in resolving ethical
disputes, especially those which arise out
of the continued increase of knowledge.
Economics specializes in the study of
that part of the total social system which
is organized through exchange and which
deals with exchangeables. This to my
mind is a better definition of economics
than those which define it as relating to
scarcity or allocation, for the allocation of
scarce resources is a universal problem
which applies to political decisions and
political structures through coercion,
threat, and even to love and community,
just as it does to exchange. I have elsewhere
distinguished three groups of social
organizers which I have called the threat
system, the exchange system, and the integrative
system. Economics clearly occupies
the middle one of these three. It
edges over towards the integrative system
insofar as it has some jurisdiction over the
study of the system of one-way transfers
of exchangeables, which I have called the
"cgrants economy," for the grant, or oneway
transfer, is a rough measure of an integrative
relationship. On the other side,
economics edges towards an area between
the threat system and the exchange system
which might be described as the study
of strategy or bargaining.
To complete the circle there is also an
area, between the threat system and the
integrative system, of legitimated threat
which is the principal organizer of political
activity and the main subject matter
of political science. All these systems are
linked together dynamically through the
process of human learning which is the
main dynamic factor in all social systems.
Part of this learning process is the learning
of common values and moral choices,
without which no culture and no social
system is possible. The process by which
we learn otr preference structures indeed
is a fundamental key to the total dynamics
of society.
Economics, as such, does not contribute
very much to the formal study of human
learning, though some philosophical economists
like Frederick Hayek [4] have
made some interesting contributions to
this subject. Our main contribution as
economists is in the description of what is
learned; the preference functions which
embody what is learned in regard to
values, and the production functions
which describe the results of the learning
of technology. XVe may not have thought
much about the genetics of knowledge,
but we have thought about its description,
and this is a contribution not to be despised.

Thus, economics suggests the proposition
that actual choices depend not only
on preferences but on opportunities, and
that under some circumstances quite small
changes in either preferences or opportu-