DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
the best evidence for evaluating whether workers
make adequate preparation for retirement.
I prefer the term "inadequate preparation" to
"insufficient savings." Preparation involves
multiple decisions. Indeed, one decision is to
save, to have less consumption than after-tax
earned income. Another is investing well. A
third is getting adequate insurance for earnings
risk to have a satisfactory outcome in retirement
despite a possibly adverse earnings experience.
And a fourth is using insurance to arrange income
flows after retirement. There are lots of
ways that workers could end up with inadequate
consumption after retirement relative to what
might sensibly and efficiently be done with earlier
earnings.
In addition to having low savings, many
workers have problems converting savings in
different years into retirement incomes in later
years in different states of nature. We know
from 401(k) studies that many workers do not
diversify sensibly and many do not choose a
sensible portfolio for long-term investments.5
The tendency of many workers to accept the
default allocation set by their employers is suggestive
that they do not have a clear view of
how to choose a portfolio. Outside employerorganized
retirement savings, others pay advisors
as much as 1 percent of assets each year to
help them select mutual funds (in what are
called wrap accounts). Paying 1 percent extra
per year reduces the accumulation at the end of
a 40-year career by roughly 20 percent.6 Mutual
funds, even very similar ones, come with quite
different annual charges. While the average of
charges of mutual funds containing equities is
currently 1 1/4 percent of assets per year (including
a prorating of front loads), some workers
pay much more. A fee of the average size takes
away roughly 25 percent from what would be
there at retirement without any fee. Thus many
workers find it harder to accumulate enough for
retirement than they might, than an idealized
theory says they should. To be clear, I am not
proposing that these market opportunities be
banned-although improvement in regulation
would be welcome. Rather, I am saying that
analysts of Social Security should be realistic
5 For an overview on 401(k)'s, see Alicia Munnell and  Annika Sund6n, 2004.
6 Deposits into an account each year for 40 years are  present in the account for roughly 20 years on average.  about the actual functioning of the market
alternatives.
Investing is only part of the story. We lack
market institutions to provide good insurance
for the risk in earnings trajectories, thereby affecting
the realized pattern of assets at retirement
relative to earnings potential. In the
Arrow-Debreu framework, workers have deterministic
budget constraints from selling their
labor supplies conditional on all the states of
nature in which they have labor that they choose
to sell. That is, they transfer resources across
states of nature to those where the purchasing
power is needed more. Making the same point
in a finance vocabulary, markets do not currently
exist for directly hedging the risks in
earnings opportunities, and if they did exist I do
not think we would see many workers using
them.7
In addition to problems in converting earnings
opportunities into wealth devoted to retirement
consumption, the wealth that is privately
allocated to retirement consumption does not
make adequate use of annuities. This problem
would be more severe without the annuities
provided by Social Security, since the utility
value of the marginal annuity decreases with the
extent of existing annuitization.
These shortcomings in providing for retirement
income fall on surviving spouses even
more heavily than on workers. While 5 percent
of elderly married couples have incomes below
the poverty line, with another 3 percent near
poverty, these figures more than triple when we
consider widows. Indeed, widowhood is associated
with a roughly 30 percent drop in income
relative to needs (Karen Holden and Cathleen
Zick, 1998).8 This is strongly suggestive of
inadequate protection of family members.
To my mind, the heart of the context for
thinking about Social Security is that it substitutes
for poor decision making and for missing
insurance opportunities (missing perhaps because
poor decision making implies low demand)
. The various shortcomings that are
apparent even in the presence of Social Security
7 If they existed, one could hedge some of earnings risk  through traded indices of wages in different regions and  industries. One could try to approximate that through trad-  ing in assets correlated with the indices.  8 Of course this is dependent on the relative measures of  need of singles and couples.
VOL. 94 NO. 1
3