threat system has been softened by the
development of exchange. Those who live
under threat, who generally occupy the
lower end of the social scale, as well as
those who live by threat at the upper end,
tend to find their personal identities
through malevolence and through the development
of counter-threat or through
the displacement of hatred onto weaker
objects, such as children and animals.
Once this state is passed, however, and society
is mainly organized by exchange,
there seems to be a strong tendency to
miove towards the integrative system and
the integrative institutions. The Rotary
Club is a logical extension of a businessoriented
society, but it is not one that
would necessarily have occurred to economists.


Oddly enough, it is not welfare economics
with its elegant casuistry, subtle distinctions,
and its ultimately rather implausible
recommendations, which has
made the greatest impact on the development
of common values and ethical propositions.
The major impact of economics on
ethics, it can be argued, has come because
it has developed broad, aggregative concepts
of general welfare which are subject
to quantification. We can see this process
going right back to Adam Smith, where
the idea of what we would today call per
capita real income, as the principal measure
of national well-being, has made a
profound impact on subsequent thinking
and policy. The development of the concept
of a gross national product and its
various modifications and components as
statistical measures of economic success,
likewise, has had a great impact in creating
common values for the objectives of
economic policy. Another, less fortunate,
example of a measure which profoundly
affected economic policy was the development
of the parity index by the Bureau of
Agricultural Economics in the United
States Department of Agriculture. As a
measure of the terms of trade -of agricul.
ture, this became an important symbol.
"A hundred per cent of parity" became
the avowed goal of agricultural policy,
even though there is very little reason to
suppose that the terms of trade of a given
historic period, in this case the period
1909-14, have any ultimate validity as
an ideal. Because of differing rates of
change in productivity in different parts
of the economy, we should expect the
terms of trade of different sectors to
change. If, for instance, productivity in
agriculture rises faster than in the rest of
the economy, as it has done in the last
thirty years, we would expect the terms of
trade of agriculture to "worsen" without
any worsening of the incomes of farmers,
and without any sense of social injustice.
Even though economic measurement
may be abused, its effect on the formation
of moral judgments is great, and on the
whole I believe beneficial. The whole idea
of cost-benefit analysis, for instance, in
terms of monetary units, say "real" dollars
of constant purchasing power, is of
enormous importance in the evaluation of
social choices and even of social institutions.
We can grant, of course, that the
"real" dollar which is oddly enough a
strictly imaginary one, is a dangerously
imperfect measure of the quality of human
life and human values. Nevertheless,
it is a useful first approximation,
and in these matters of evaluation of difficult
choices it is extremely useful to have
some first approximation that we can then
modify. Without this, indeed, all evaluation
is random selection by wild hunches.
It is true, of course, that cost-benefit analysis
of all sorts of things, whether of
water projects, other pork barrel items, or
in more recent years weapon systems, can
be manipulated to meet the previous prejudices
of people who are trying to influence
the decisions. Nevertheless, the fundamental
principle that we should count