asymmetric information and has given rise to
the modeling of incentive-compatible contracts.
Third, since explicit written contracts
between unions and employers cover only a
small part of the workers involved in longterm
relationships, what keeps either workers
or firms from violating the implicit agreement
or exploiting their half of bilateral monopoly
situations when conditions are favorable
to do so? Analysis of this issue has
given rise to the concept of a firm's labor
market "reputation," or brand-name capital,
fear of losing which provides an enforcement
constraint. This is the problem of enforcement.


Three major strands of the literature on
implicit contracts can be discerned, each of
which emphasizes one of the rationales for
the continuity of association (without necessarily
denying the existence of other aspects),
and each of which deals somewhat differently
with the problems cited in the prior
paragraph.' The earliest version of implicit
contracts emphasized the role of risk aversion,
firms being either risk neutral or less
risk averse than workers to fluctuations in
their income.2 Firms thus offer risk-sharing
contracts that improve social welfare relative
to spot auction markets. Another body of
research stresses transactions costs and asset
specificity -that is, the acquisition of firmspecific
skills by workers, and specific and
valuable knowledge about each other by both
firms and workers.3 This approach also emphasizes
the asymmetry of knowledge between
firms and workers about the marginal
revenue product of labor, and its influence
on the nature of the contract. Still a different
emphasis is given in the efficiency wage4
literature to an assumed positive correlation
between the level (or the career profile) of
wages on the one hand and the "effort" or
productivity of workers on the other.5
While there are substantial differences
among these various approaches, they all
conclude that, under optimal contracts, real
wages will be smoothed in the face of changes
in the marginal revenue product of labor
relative to what would be predicted by an
auction market. And all of them provide a
rationale for the existence of ex post Pareto
inefficiency and involuntary unemployment.
II. Some Extensions to Implicit Contract Theory
We can distinguish several categories and
subcategories of changes in economic circumstances,
the wage response to which must
be accommodated by social conventions and
informal understandings that we call implicit
contracts. Let us consider first some of the
implications of contract theory as it deals
with the response of wages to changes in the
relative conditions facing individual firms or
labor markets. For that purpose I define
relative changes to be those which occur on
the assumption that the perceived general
level of opportunities facing workers-call
it W-remains unchanged in real and nominal
terms. (The relevant W is, of course, in
real terms. But since we are here abstracting
from any aggregate disturbances, real and
nominal W are the same.) In turn there are
two kinds of relative changes in economic
conditions that implicit contracts must allow
for; changes which are realizations of a probability
distribution known at the time the
contract is entered, and those stemming from
developments to which no basis could be
found for assigning probabilities.