Why is there so little agreement among econ-
omists regarding policy-value questions when
there is so much agreement on the positive
questions? One possible explanation is differ-
ences in values. Most health policy decisions
have significant implications for freedom, effi-
ciency, justice, and security. Health economists
(like other Americans) probably desire all these
goals, but (again like other Americans) they
probably differ in the values they attach to
them, or in the way they define them,3' and
these differences could lead to sharply different
views about policy.
Another possible explanation is that there
are positive questions embedded in the policy-
value questions and that health economists dis-
agree with respect to those positive questions.
This is the view taken by Milton Friedman in
195332 although he subsequently modified his
position in 1966 and 1995.33 In order to gain
some insights concerning the roles of values
and embedded positive issues in policy differ-
ences I take a closer look at the policy-value
questions bearing on national health insurance
(3, 7, 14, 15) and on insurance company un-
derwriting (8, 17, 20).
Consider, for instance, question 3 which
calls for some national plan to cover the entire
population. The 62-38 percent split among
health economists may well reflect differences
in values, with those who agree placing a high
value on providing all Americans with the
right to have access to health care. On the other
hand, it is readily apparent that there are many
positive questions embedded in this policy-
value question. For instance, most economists
see a loss in efficiency from requiring every-
one to have the same health insurance, but they
probably differ in their estimates of the extent
of the loss. Some may even believe there is a
net gain in efficiency because of imperfections
in the private market for health insurance.
Strongly held differences about this positive
question could produce different answers to
question 3 even among respondents with sim-
ilar values.
Some of the positive questions embedded in
question 3 may be beyond the scope of con-
ventional economics. For instance, Professor
A may favor national health insurance in part
because she believes it will contribute to a
more stable and harmonious society.34 Profes-
sor B may disagree with that prediction, and
is therefore less inclined to support national
health insurance.
The role of embedded positive questions
can also be easily discerned in the three ques-
tions (8, 17, 20) dealing with insurance com-
pany underwriting. Health economists strongly
support charging higher premiums for smokers
than for nonsmokers, but are strongly opposed
to charging higher premiums to individuals
born with genetic defects. On question 8, deal-
ing with requiring insurance companies to in-
sure the sick with no premium surcharge, the
health economists are evenly split. One of the
positive questions embedded in question 8 is
the reason for people's illness. If a respondent
thought that most illness was the result of ge-
netic differences, the reply would presumably
be consistent with the answer to question 20.
On the other hand, if most illness was assumed
to be the result of personal behaviors like cig-
arette smoking, the reply would probably be
consistent with the one given to question 17.
Inasmuch as leading medical scientists have
strongly divergent views about the importance
of genetic factors in disease, it is hardly
surprising that health economists are unable
to reach agreement. The state of knowledge
about the links between genes and disease is