edge.' Even what in the usual neoclassical
model is considered mere factor-substitution
is in this alternative framework viewed
as implying the invention of new types of
goods, viz. of less labor-intensive equipment.
I will explain later why I will
merely keep an eye on the conclusions obtainable
from this construction which is
neither neoclassical nor Cambridgeian,
and why the main part of my analysis
will move in the framework usually referred
to as neoclassical.2 Objections raised
against the neoclassical models are quite
inconclusive in their present form, because
the question is not whether the assumptions
underlying such models are
"'realistic" (a good photograph of reality),
but whether in the real world these assumptions
are violated in such respects
and to such an extent as to render the
analytical results misleading. This the critics
have so far not even tried to show.
I. A Ratio of Benefit-Streamt to Cost and the
Corresponding Average Social
Rate of Return
The costs of generating progress consist
of the costs of producing new knowledge,
and the costs of increased per-capita knowledge-
distribution, and of the extra-costs of
chiangeovers from the use of old to the use of
new knowledge. This seems a reasonable
way of looking at our problem, because
if knowledge in use remained constant
per capita, the rate of progress would be
I In the case of the United States "practically all,"
because here terms-of-trade effects, the consequences of
improved diets, etc. play no major role. There remains
an ambiguity in connection with the consequences of
intersector shifts, on which see the discussion of the two
Kendrick measures in Section III.
2 To illustrate with the simplest kind of CobbDouglas
function applicable to the problem, as well as
this is possible for a single period (t= n):
Q(n) = F( E LR, E KR, LR(n), KE(n),
o o
LA(n), KA(n))L4(n)K$(n)
LR, KR = research-type inputs, in the broad sense.
LE(n), KE(n) = education (knowledge-distribution)
inputs which were applied in the past, or are being applied
in period n, to the labor force of period n, expressed
per capita of this labor force.
LA(n), KA(n) =inputs required for changing over to
improved industrial methods (mainly the obsolescencecomponent
of capital-replacement)..
Lc(n), Kc(n) = those inputs of period n not accounted
for in the argument of F, except that the education inputs
applied in period n to persons who are not yet
members of the labor force belong neither in Lc(n),
Kc(n) nor of course in the argument of F.
The algebraic form and the parameters of F depend on
factors not formalized in the equation, such as abilities
and habits of the population; policies other than those
expressing themselves in the R and E inputs; various
inputs in foreign economies; the relative weight of that
part of the old knowledge which remains useful when
new knowledge is acquired, etc. It will be seen later
that the convenient definition of the rate of technological
progress here is d In F/dt.
In this model avoidance of the implication of economies
of scale would require (3<1-a, instead of the
conventional (3=1 -a, but it may be preferable to face
the problem of such economies as one giving rise to the
qualifications discussed in the opening paragraph of
Section III.
The progress-generating inputs should be defined so
that if the variables in the argument of F assume the
values to which zero progress-generating input corresponds,
then d In F/dt=O (in which case, however,
JLc and IKc would be larger than at positive values of the
progress-inputs and of this derivative). Hence the progress-
generating inputs for period n consist of the
period's additions to the two E terms; and of the increase
of LB and KE expressed per capita of the labor
force of period n, as compared to the immediately preceding
period's Lg and KB expressed per capita of that
period's labor force; and of LA(n) and KA(n). In principle,
one of the magnitudes representing a progressinput
(increased per capita education) could turn out
to be negative, and avoidance of this awkwardness
would then call for some adjustments of terminology,
but in our context this may be disregarded.
If the methods of measuring progress call for limiting
Q to the private sector (usually including governmentowned
enterprise), then Lc and Kc should also be so
limited, but the argument of F should nevertheless include
also the public-sector inputs of the type specified
in the lines under the equation.
The larger cost-base to be defined in Section II involves
"charging" to the progress generated in a period
all progress-generating inputs for the period; the smaller
cost-base to be defined in Section II involves charging
merely the "profit-oriented" progress-inputs, which in
turn implies that the costs of the other progress-inputs
are recovered outside the market process and that the
progress-account should therefore be "credited" with
these nonmarket values.