The address of the departing president is
no place for modesty. Nevertheless, I must
resist the temptation to describe the analysis
I will report here as anything like a revolution.
Perhaps terms such as "rebellion" or
"uprising" are rather more apt. But, nevertheless,
I shall seek to convince you that the
work my colleagues, John Panzar and Robert
Willig, and I have carried out and encapsulated
in our new book enables us to look at
industry structure and behavior in a way that
is novel in a number of respects, that it
provides a unifying analytical structure to
the subject area, and that it offers useful
insights for empirical work and for the formulation
of policy.

Before getting into the substance of the
analysis I admit that this presidential address
is most unorthodox in at least one significant
respect-that it is not the work of a single
author. Here it is not even sufficient to refer
to Panzar and Willig, the coauthors of both
the substance and the exposition of the book
in which the analysis is described in full. For
others have made crucial contributions to the
formulation of the theory-most notably
Elizabeth Bailey, Dietrich Fischer, Herman
Quirmbach, and Thijs ten Raa.
But there are many more than these. No
uprising by a tiny band of rebels can hope to
change an established order, and when the
time for rebellion is ripe it seems to break
out simultaneously and independently in a
variety of disconnected centers each offering
its own program for the future. Events here
have been no different. I have recently received
a proposal for a conference on new
developments in the theory of industry structure
formulated by my colleague, Joseph
Stiglitz, which lists some forty participants,
most of them widely known. Among those
working on the subject are persons as well
known as Caves, Dasgupta, Dixit, Friedlaender,
Grossman, Hart, Levin, Ordover,
Rosse, Salop, Schmalensee, Sonnenschein,
Spence, Varian, von Weiszacker, and
Zeckhauser, among many others.' It is, of
course, tempting to me to take the view that
our book is the true gospel of the rebellion
and that the doctrines promulgated by others
must be combatted as heresy. But that could
at best be excused as a manifestation of the
excessive zeal one comes to expect on such
occasions. In truth, the immediate authors of
the work I will report tonight may perhaps
be able to justify a claim to have offered
some systematization and order to the new
doctrines-to have built upon them a more
comprehensive statement of the issues and
the analysis, and to have made a number of
particular contributions. But, in the last
analysis, we must look enthusiastically upon
our fellow rebels as comrades in arms, each
of whom has made a crucial contribution to
the common cause.

Turning now to the substance of the theory,
let me begin by contrasting our results
with those of the standard theory. In offering
this contrast, let me emphasize that much of
the analysis rests on work that appeared
considerably earlier in a variety of forms.