How do we keep track of the contradictions
and confirmations? How do we
keep the score of surviving hypotheses?
And what are we doing in those directions?
The same questions have been raised before,
among others by my predecessors,
Wassily Leontief and Robert Aaron Gordon,
and good and bad examples of concern
and unconcern were referred to by
both of them. Meanwhile, unresolved issues,
sometimes important ones from the policy
point of view, and mostly quantitative ones,
drag on and remain unresolved. Do they
have to?
With one exception I am aware of, even
our best college-level introductory texts of
economics do not press these questions.
They teach good reasoning, and describe
the views of leading minds and schools of
thought, present and past, in the field.
Texts in econometrics teach with great care
how to test assumptions and to estimate
parameters, duly emphasizing the crucial
role of the models. What is also needed is
to teach the tested and confirmed statements.

VII. Aphorisms on Interactions
After all I have said about the need for
empirical validation, I owe you a brief report
on my own casual-empirical sample
study of the difficulties of interaction between
scientists, engineers, and economists,
as seen by participants in joint studies.
Rather than classifying and tabulating the
views expressed, I shall let the respondents
speak for themselves. The following is a
selection (by me) of statements, drawn from
my notes, that carried the most punch.
A physical scientist: "Economists are
technological radicals. They assume everything
can be done."
A geologist: "Economists have been
too enthusiastic about deep sea mining.
They think there is more than there is, that
it is easier to get up than it is, and easier to
process than it is."
A development economist: "Scientists
think big. Economists are marginalists.
Scientists don't think in terms of opportunity
cost."
An engineer: "Economics is not dismal
but incomplete. The things missed are very
important."'
A life scientist: "Market imperfection
is more widespread than economists care to
admit."
An economist: "Where economists see
the invisible hand guiding the market place
to produce pretty good outcomes, scientists
see only chaos."
An engineer: "The economic motive is
overrated."
A psychologist: "All the conclusions
that are drawn from the assumption of rationality
can also be drawn from assumptions
of adaptive behavior."
A life scientist: "Economists have great
skill in handling data. However, they tend
to ask only for data, not for concepts and
ideas. Drawing up a model is an interdisciplinary
task."
An engineer: "Economists often use
smooth production functions even when
engineers might be reluctant to do so."
A life scientist: "Many scientists do not
understand discounting."
An engineer: "Economics is the Thermodynarnics
of the Social Sciences. Everything
is deduced from a few simple postulates
without the necessity for knowing
detailed mechanisms."
VIII. Final Remarks
After this instructive intermezzo, allow
me a few final words. I will not be able to
match the brevity and incisiveness we just
savored. However, I do look on the collaboration
of the diverse professions involved
in the newly discovered joint problems
as an important development. To
economists it is a new challenge and a new
frontier. Among the problems themselves
are some of great importance, nationally
and internationally. They deserve the best
effort and talent that can be brought to
bear, within and across the disciplines.
An important talent requiring cultivation
is skill in communication between dislThe
reference is to the need to fit environmental
protection into economic analysis.