education experiment designed to alter smoking
and other risks for heart disease (Nathan
Maccoby and Douglas S. Solomon, 1981).
Identical regressions of smoking on schooling
were estimated at age 17 and at age 24,
with schooling measured in both cases as the
number of years the individual would eventually
complete. The most striking result was
the absence of any increase in the size of the
schooling coefficient between the ages of 17
and 24. The additional schooling could not
be the cause of the differential smoking behavior
(and by extension the differential
health associated with smoking) at age 24
because the differences in smoking were already
evident at age 17, before the differences
in schooling had emerged (Philip
Farrell and Fuchs, 1982) .20
In my judgment, the most likely explanation
for the high correlation between health and
schooling is that both reflect differences in
time preference (Fuchs, 1982). Both health
and schooling are aspects of investment in human
capital; differences among individuals in
time preference that are established at an early
age could result in different amounts of investment
in health and education.21
Although I believe there have been many
fruitful interactions between economics and
health, the political debate over health care
reform in 1993-1994 benefited much less
than it could have from the insights of economists.
Possible explanations for the failure
of health economics research to have more
impact on policy are explored in the next
section.
II. The Present
George Stigler's Presidential Address to the
American Economic Association in December
1964 was distinctive in its emphasis on prophecy
over preaching. To be specific, Stigler predicted
that economics was "at the threshold of
its golden age" (Stigler, 1965 p. 17) because
"the age of quantification is now full upon us"
(p. 16). The growth of empirical estimation
was, for Stigler, "a scientific revolution of the
very first magnitude" (p. 17). He believed
that empirical research would have an impact
on policy far beyond anything possible from
theory alone because "a theory can usually be
made to support diverse policy positions. Theories
present general relationships, and which
part of a theory is decisive in a particular context
is a matter of empirical evidence" (p. 13).
With regard to health care, Stigler's prediction
of a vast expansion in empirical research
has been amply fulfilled. During the past 30
years economists have published thousands of
empirical articles on various aspects of health
and medical care. But the shallow and inconclusive
debate over health policy in 1993-
1994 contradicts his expectation that this
research would narrow the range of partisan
disputes and make a significant contribution to
the reconciliation of policy differences.22 What
went wrong?
One possibility is that the research was inconclusive.
If health economists cannot agree
among themselves, why should their research
have a salutary effect on public policy? Second,
even if the research were conclusive, it
would not be of much help to policy if the
results were not adequately disseminated to a
wider audience. A third possible explanation
is that the policy debate foundered on differences
in values, differences which could not
be reconciled by empirical research, however
conclusive and however well disseminated.
To gain some insight into these matters,
I prepared a 20-question survey concerning
health economics and health policy and sent it
to health economists, economic theorists, and
practicing physicians. The health economists
were those whom I considered to be the lead-
20 It is worth noting that the negative relation between
schooling and smoking is only evident for cohorts that
reached age 17 after the information about the effects of
smoking on health became available. It is also of interest
that the relationship has not diminished for more recent
cohorts even though the information about the negative
consequences of smoking has become more widely
available.
21 There are alternative or complementary "third variable"
explanations possible; compare Albert Bandura's
(1991) concept of self-efficacy.
22 Stigler's optimism regarding the impact of empirical
research on policy may have had more vindication in other
fields, but my research into family issues (Fuchs, 1983)
and gender issues (Fuchs, 1988a) do not lead me to such
a conclusion.