We have just seen that from 1953 to
1966 the ratio of total recorded R & D cost
to private GNP rose by more than 100
percent. For the period 1929-1953 only
sporadic and incomplete data are available,
but there is good reason to conclude
that during this period there occurred a
very significant increase of R & D inputs in
relation to real private GNP, and that in
terms of undeflated values the increase was
even more substantial than in real terms
(see Appendix B). These increases are out
of line with the rise of the rate of productivity-
increase. The latter is a 60 percent
or, at most, a 75 percent increase even if we
go back to 1900-1929 and thus compare
the pre-1929 period with the present.34
The efficiency of the edutcational complement
of research would to some extent
become adjusted to the requirements set
by new knowledge-production even if
per capita knowledge inputs did not rise in
quantity. In reality the quantity of these
inputs has risen appreciably. Partly from
HEW data and partly from those of Fritz
Machlup, I infer that from the calendar
year 1953 to 1966 the cost of increased per
capita education rose from the equivalent
of 0.3 percent of private GNP to the
equivalent of about 0.5 percent (see Appendix
B). Increased education works itself
out with significant lags, but an appreciable
rate of increase dates back far
into the past. Therefore, trend-appraisals
are not appreciably distorted if we associate
0.3 percent with the 1953 benefit, and
0.5 percent with the 1966 benefit, though
the levels of the rates of progress-return
are somewhat distorted-i.e., are calculated
as if the lag did not exist-a fact that
need not disturb us much because the
smaller cost of the past, which in view of
the lag would represent a more appropriate
present charge, arose correspondingly
earlier and for that reason should be
viewed as the equivalent of more than the
undiscounted figure suggests.35
As for the industry-financed (institutionally
profit-oriented) R & D, this rose
from $2.2 billions in 1953 to $7.2 billions in
1966. When expressed in relation to private
GNP we obtain a rise from 0.7 percent to
1.1 percent. In Appendix B it is shown that
the post-1953 rise of this particular proportion
is likely to have been mainly (perhaps
entirely) the result of the increase in the
relative prices of R & D inputs. That is to
say, here the relative-valuation component
accounts for practically the entire effect,
while for total R & D, the real-input component
also was significant (even for 1953-
1966).
Regardless of whether we are interested
in yields on our all-inclusive cost-base or in
yields on a cost-base limited to institutionally
yield-oriented progress-inputs, exclusive
concern on the cost-side with
recorded R & D and with increased per
capita education would lead to the twin
conclusions that yields have been declining
steeply and that they nevertheless still are
at a "perplexing" level. Such calculations
are misleading because they disregard the
fact that obsolescence in the conventional
sense, as well as some costs of a character
similar to that of obsolescense, and also
some costs of a different kind, are omitted
from the recorded progress-generating costs.
This is so even if for the present purpose we
regard the education costs in Machlup's
broadened sense as "recorded." Many of
the unrecorded costs, including obsolescense
itself, fall in the category which in
Section I, I called costs of changeovers to