Recent work on behavioral economics has
helped to make the possibility of such irrationality
or myopic behavior a part of mainstream
economics.
But such departures from rational saving by a
fraction of the population need not justify the
general provision of social insurance benefits.
Why not simply provide means-tested benefits
instead of the universal provision of social insurance
benefits? The primary reason for not
doing so is that some rational and farsighted
individuals would be induced by a means-tested
system to act in a way that allows them to
qualify for benefits. Doing so would impose tax
costs on the rest of the population that could
make overall well-being lower than in a universal
(i.e., not means-tested) program.
Consider a simple example of a means-tested
retirement program (Feldstein, 1987). Assume
that some fraction of the population is myopic
and would not save anything for retirement. A
means-tested program would provide a benefit
for all such myopic retirees. How would rational
working-age individuals respond to such a
system? They would have the choice of either
saving for their own retirement or consuming all
of their income before they retire and receiving
the means-tested benefit. The potential meanstested
benefit acts as a kind of tax on saving,
reducing the incremental retirement consumption
that saving would produce. A rational individual
would decide whether to act as if he or
she is myopic by comparing the lifetime utilities
with optimal positive saving and with no saving.
Those with relatively high incomes would
not be tempted by the means-tested benefit. But
others with lower incomes would have higher
lifetime utility by increasing their consumption
during working years even if the means-tested
benefits would only provide lower consumption
during retirement than optimal saving would
allow. Although they would achieve higher lifetime
utility through their action, their benefits
would be financed by tax-financed transfers,
which would make others worse off.
There is no way for the government to distinguish
between the genuinely myopic and
those who are rational utility maximizers gaming
the system. The government could, in principle,
set the means-tested benefit so low that
very few rational individuals would be tempted.
My judgment is that our relatively affluent society
would not accept that policy. The means-
tested benefits would be set at a higher level that
would tempt many rational individuals to save
nothing.
A policy of forcing everyone to save for his
or her own retirement would eliminate the problem
of those who game the system. The only
adverse effect of such a policy is that some
individuals might be required to shift more of
their lifetime consumption to their retirement
years than they would prefer. For them, part of
the mandatory saving would be a tax to the
extent that they valued the saving less than
current consumption.
The choice between such a mandatory saving
plan-essentially a kind of investment-based
Social Security pension-and a means-tested
benefit should depend on numbers. How many
people would receive means-tested benefits?
How much deadweight loss would be involved
in financing those benefits? How many people
in a mandatory saving plan would have to provide
more for their retirement than they want?
In the absence of such a mandatory investment-
based option, the policy choice is between
a means-tested program and a universal pay-asyou-
go retirement benefit. Such a pay-asyou-
go plan forces all individuals (after the
initial generation) to receive a lower rate of
return than they could obtain on private saving.
As such, it also imposes a tax on labor income
since each extra dollar of earnings would induce
an additional pay-as-you-go tax liability. The
reduction in saving that is induced by the payas-
you-go system also causes a fall in capital
income and therefore in corporate and personal
tax revenue that requires higher marginal tax
rates to recover the lost revenue.
Both of these examples of asymmetric information
show that a social insurance program may be
an appropriate response to a market failure but that
it need not be. Even when there is a market failure,
it may be better to do nothing or to have a meanstested
welfare program. The choice depends in
part on the relative costs of the different options,
and those in turn depend on the design of the
potential social insurance program. Whether such
a program is investment-based or purely tax financed
on a pay-as-you-go basis is an important
feature of that cost.
Economists can help to evaluate these choices
by estimating the relevant costs and benefits of the
different options. My own conclusion is that
investment-based social insurance programs for