Myrdal is one of those to emphasize that
"in modern society the tendency of inflation
to become cumulative and to accelerate
is rooted in a wide and complex
institutional reality" (p. 24), and to urge
a broader, institutionally oriented analysis
of underlying causes and possible remedies.
Another is Peter Wiles in a provocative
recent essay in the Economic Journal.
Among these institutional changes making
for more rapid and apparently accelerating
inflation are the postwar commitment in
all advanced countries to a high level of
employment (stronger in Europe than in
the United States), the reluctance fully to
cover increasing public expenditures by
taxation, the growing tendency to link
wage and other payments to the consumer
price index, the increasing aggressiveness
of trade unions (emphasized by Wiles)
and other organized groups of income receivers,
an apparent weakening of the
willingness of employers to resist wage demands
(which is closely related to the government'
s commitment to high employment)
, and the intensification of inflationary
expectations engendered by past
inflation. (See Myrdal, pp. 23 ff.) To all of
which we can add an international monetary
system that permitted huge dollar
outflows which became expanded monetary
reserves for other countries. This is a
familiar list. But how do these different
but related inflationary pressures interact?
Why have they become stronger? How do
we account for the particular rate of acceleration
that has occurred? Why does
the rate of acceleration seem to be different,
and because of what differences in the
institutional environment, in different
countries? And how have the significant
changes in the international system of
trade and finance affected these inflationary
trends? (See R. J. Gordon.)
I shall merely mention one other example
of the failure of economists today to take
adequate account in setting up their
models of the changing institutional environment.
This has to do with the determinants
of household behavior, with
respect to both the demand for goods and
services and the supply of labor services.
What has been the effect on household behavior,
for example, of advancing levels of
education, changes in the ways that news
is disseminated, recent trends toward urbanization
and suburbanization, or the
massive change in the impact of advertising
made possible by television?'8 To what
extent have these and other developments
made households behave more or less in
the way that economic theory assumes?
What bearing do these and other institutional
developments have on the behavior
of personal saving in recent years, in this
and other countries, and on the way that
households respond to recent and prospective
inflationary trends?
III
I turn now to my second question about
the changing institutional environment.
Why does the central body of economic
analysis show so little interest in why and
how the institutional setting for economic
behavior has changed in the past and is
likely to change in the future? The past, of
course, is the domain of the historian, but
I am not aware that the vast amount of
historical research in the past century or
more has yet given us an acceptable model
of socioeconomic development in today's
advanced economies. As I put it more than
a decade ago, "Contemporary economics
does not yet have the tools required for a
comprehensive and evolutionary theory of
economic behavior that would take appropriate
account of the main lines of institutional
change" (p. 146).19 Schumpeter
(1947) came closer in this century to providing