Much of mankind's accumulated knowledge
performs functions other than that of
increasing our command over goods and
services in the usual sense of these words.
The value of such knowledge is not instrumental
in an economic-technological
context. It is equally clear that contributors
to the growth of knowledge have all
along been motivated largely by a desire to
improve their understanding of the world
into which they were born. "From science
to engineering and from engineering to
more goods and services" would be an unduly
drab account of man's quest for knowledge.


Yet in societies of various types, financial
and other incentives have become
established for directing inventive and educational
abilities to specific tasks carrying
economic promise. Moreover, for several
centuries the Western conception of
knowledge that is valuable for its own
sake has been appreciably influenced by
the ideals of natural scientists and mathematicians.
It is a fact of crucial importance
that this has created a cultural environment
in which a reasonably high degree of
correlation may be found between the accumulation
of knowledge per se and subsequent
technological applications. The
methods of measuring the economic yield
of new knowledge and of measuring the
trend of that yield have many inevitable
limitations reflecting the indirectness of
the relation of the knowledge-acquisition
process to its economic consequences. My
paper will be concerned with these yields
and trends.

The inputs which in this study will be
regarded as progress-generating will be so
defined because they increase the economic
productivity of inputs at large. Our progress-
inputs could be viewed as producing
intangible capital that is instrumental to
the production of goods and services and
also intangible consumer capital serving as
a source of direct satisfaction. But this is
merely a simile because the properties of
this intangible investment militate against
treating it as output in the sense proper.
The "intangible investment" results in an
increase of the value of terms which in
static versions of neoclassical production
functions would be parameters. The progress-
generating inputs of each period may
then be viewed as producing additional
output indirectly, via their effect on such
terms of otherwise conventionally defined
production functions. In my appraisal,
interpreting the progress-generating inputs
of any period, and their immediate results,
in this distinctive fashion describes the
most convenient way of separating them
out for specific analysis.
As I shall show later, however, very
similar results are obtained in an analytical
framework of different character in
which practically all long-ruIn increase in
output per man-hour is interpreted as developing
from additional per capita knowledge.'