frontier in many fields. On that account, the
effort and experience on which world tech-
nological advance rests now has a wider
base. The United States, therefore, should
now begin to profit more from other coun-
tries' technical effort even as other countries
borrow from us. It remains to be seen, of
course, whether we shall prove as successful
at borrowing and adapting foreign technol-
ogy as some other countries have been.
The advance of other countries, however,
also has a darker side for us. The develop-
ment of many industries in which this coun-
try has long been a leader is now threatened
by the competition of other countries. This
changes the prospects for U.S. productivity
growth to our disadvantage. It is harder for
an industry to push forward, or even to keep
up with, the technological frontier when its
rate of expansion slows down, still harder
when it is contracting. It is an old story that,
in the course of aggregate productivity
growth, the rise of new, more rapidly pro-
gressing industries constricts the growth of
the old. That is Schumpeter's "creative de-
struction," and it helps explain why retarda-
tion in the growth of output and productiv-
ity is the normal fate of individual industries
within a country, while the growth rate of
the aggregate remains constant or even
speeds up. The reverse, however, is not nec-
essarily true, nor even probably true. We
cannot count on new, more progressive sec-
tors stepping into the breach merely because
the development of our old industries is
constricted by foreign competition. Foreign
success, of course, offers us cheap imports.
Yet the experience of Britain from 1870 to
1913 presents this country with a worrisome
historical question mark. As Britain's basic
industries lost their leadership and markets
to the United States, Germany, and other
countries after 1870, Britain's labor produc-
tivity growth rate was halved compared with
previous decades, and her average total fac-
tor productivity growth during the forty
years after 1870 fell to zero.'8 The question
is: Can we mount a more energetic and
successful response to the challenge of newly
rising foreign competitors after 1970 than
Britain did after 1870?19
The relative decline of U. S. economic and
political power carries with it other disad-
vantages, and not for ourselves alone. The
leadership of the United States in the liber-
alization and stabilization of international
economic relations was one of the bases for
rapid world-wide productivity growth in the
postwar years. We were able to assert that
leadership because superabundant economic
strength permitted us to propose arrange-
ments beneficial to ourselves but generous
to other countries, and because dominant
political power persuaded sometimes re-
calcitrant partners to cooperate. Today, with
U.S. influence reduced and U.S. as well as
European industries under pressure, the
world economy is threatened by a resur-
gence of protectionism, in which this coun-
try is itself taking part. The world-wide price
discipline, which a relatively stable U. S
monetary policy imposed through the dol-
lar-exchange standard, has, for the time
being, been lost. And with U.S. influence
diminished, effective international coopera-
tion in the petroleum market and in other
aspects of relations between industrialized
and developing countries has been beyond
our reach.
In these circumstances, it is just as dif-
ficult to maintain a vision of an unbroken 3