therefore be placed on tendencies observ-
able by comparing typical data for a
limited number of consecutive periods, and
importance will be attributed to the fact
that when the Residual is used as a point of
departure for estimating benefits, and the
costs are defined as those of our progress-
generatinog inputs, the benefit-trends and
cost-trends show a fairly consistent rela-
tionship that "makes sense."
The method of the Residual can be em-
ployed in different ways. Kendrick has
measured a magnitude he calls total factor
productivity, this being a productivity
measure from which he excludes the conse-
quences of allocational shifts among sectors
(his industry groupings). Hence here the
shifts, which in fact have favored the
higher-productivity sectors (industry
groups), are made to express themselves as
increases of weighted physical inputs rather
than of productivity. Further, Kendrick
has measured a magnitude which he calls
"output per unit of total input" and which
differs from his "total factor productivity"
only in that it registers the results of the
intersector shifts as productivity-increases
rather than as increase of weighted input-
quantity. Both concepts relate to the pri-
vate domestic economy.
Both measures used by Kendrick regis-
ter larger productivity-increases than those
consistent with the usual two-factor class-
room models, because his input-estimates
include estimates of farm land and of real
estate (site land) as part of his estimate of
capital. The relative fixity of this input
reduces the growth-rates of physical in-
puts, thus increasing the Residual. Aside
from this, some technical considerations
suggest that, by their own standards, the
Kendrick measures of productivity-gains
err somewhat on the high side but other
considerations point in the opposite direc-
tion.
From 1900 to 1929, factor productivity,
including the favorable effect of inter-
group shifts, rose at an annual compound
rate of 1.8 percent (during the last ten
years of the period it rose at 2.0 percent);
from 1929 to 1948 the rise occurred at the
rate of 2.3 percent; from 1948 to 1966 at
2.8 percent, with no acceleration during
these past eighteen years. If we exclude
from the productivity-increase the favor-
able effect of Kendrick's intergroup shifts,
we obtain somewhat smaller productivity
increases but broadly similar trends for
these, except that some further accelera-