a new job had only a 20 percent probability
of holding that job as long as five years.
While the large magnitude of rents for
experienced workers tends to provide some
room for errors, workers are presumably
arranged along a spectrum with respect to
their own evaluation of potential opportunities
elsewhere. As a consequence, the losses
from the errors will be a continuous positive
function of the size of the errors. Errors of
the opposite type-failing to introduce a
contract change to meet a permanent alteration
in the climate-can be reversed at a
much smaller cost. Some workers will have
remained too long with a particular firm,
while a smaller group will have lost income
from the higher layoffs associated with this
type of error. But these losses are likely to be
much smaller than the loss of the rent stream
itself, unless the error persists for a long
time.
Thus, given Knightian uncertainty about
economic conditions over the long length of
job tenures, implicit contracts must allow for
the possibility of relative wage changes in the
face of climatic changes in external conditions.
But the interest of both firms and
workers dictates that those changes occur
only after enough information has been
accumulated to warrant a high probability
forecast that the change is permanent. To
justify a substantial wage adjustment, it is
not sufficient that the firm act on unbiased
forecasts-they must also acquire some confidence
in the accuracy of the forecasts.
One might object to this line of reasoning
on grounds that failure to adjust wages
quickly enough while the evidence is accumulating
that the change in circumstances is
permanent, is itself likely to send out wrong
signals. If, for example, wages are slow to
adjust downward when the demand for labor
falls, employment will decline. Why will
workers not take this as a signal that the
future stream of benefits from staying in the
current job have declined relative to earlier
anticipation? There are a number of reasons
why this objection is not valid. First, a change
in wages is known immediately, while it takes
some time to begin to realize that an actual
change in employment reflects a shift in the
long-term distribution of employment probabilities.
Second, the common practice of
layoffs subject to recall is a way for a firm to
signal that the lower employment is expected
to be temporary. Third, significant downward
changes in relative wages are not lightly
made. Given the inability of workers easily to
assess the magnitude of the available rents,
firms are deterred from exploiting the bilateral
monopoly relationship through the
damage they might do to their "reputations"
and the future increases in employment costs
thereby imposed. Since reputation is a fragile
asset, and since workers are naturally less
likely than firms to interpret current facts as
warranting a relative wage cut, firms must
wait until a substantial body of evidence
points in the required direction. The efficiency
wage literature emphasizes the unfavorable
productivity consequences of relative wage
reductions that turn out to be unwarranted.
And, since firms know that it is difficult to
reduce wages once they have been raised,
they do not want to make a mistake in the
upward direction. As a consequence, wage
changes that survive these barriers are much
more clearly interpreted as a signal that the
stream of future rents has changed than are
variations in employment.
Efficient implicit wage contracts, in the
presence of uncertainty, must also have the
characteristic that they minimize "haggling
costs." They should not lead to a constantly
renewed battle over the division of the rents.
Frequent struggles would waste resources,
possibly reduce productivity, and erode
scarce reputation capital, thereby reducing
the probability of long-tenure associations.
These considerations argue that significant
relative wage adjustments to meet perceived
permanent changes in condition be an infrequent
occurrence and not lightly changed
once made.
In sum, modern contract theory concludes
that relative wages will tend to be quite
sticky in comparison to predictions from the
auction market model, in the face of changes
in conditions that are the realizations of
known probability distributions-what I
have loosely called temporary changes. But
the existence of very lengthy job tenures and
the large gains from continuity suggest that
the social conventions and informal agreements