The world economy today is vastly
different from the 1930's, when Seymour
Harris, the chairman of this meeting, infected
me with his boundless enthusiasm
for economics and his steadfast confidence
in its capacity for good works. Economics
is very different, too. Both the science and
its subject have changed, and for the
better, since World War II. But there are
some notable constants. Unemployment
and inflation still preoccupy and perplex
economists, statesmen, journalists, housewives,
and everyone else. The connection
between them is the principal domestic
economic burden of presidents and prime
ministers, and the major area of controversy
and ignorance in macroeconomics.
I have chosen to review economic thought
on this topic on this occasion, partly because
of its inevitable timeliness, partly
because of a personal interest reaching
back to my first published work in 1941.
I. The Meanings of Full Employment
Today, as thirty and forty years ago,
economists debate how much unemployment
is voluntary, how much involuntary;
how much is a phenomenon of equilibrium,
how much a symptom of disequilibrium;
how much is compatible with competition,
how much is to be blamed on monopolies,
labor unions, and restrictive legislation;
how much unemployment characterizes
"full" employment.

Full employment imagine macroeconomics
deprived of the concept. But
what is it? What is the proper employment
goal of policies affecting aggregate demand?
Zero unemployment in the monthly
labor force survey? That outcome is so
inconceivable outside of Switzerland that
it is useless as a guide to policy. Any other
numerical candidate, yes even 4 percent,
is patently arbitrary without reference to
basic criteria. Unemployment equal to
vacancies? Measurement problems aside,
this definition has the same straightforward
appeal as zero unemployment, which
it simply corrects for friction.1
A concept of full employment more
congenial to economic theory is labor
market equilibrium, a volume of employment
which is simultaneously the amount
employers want to offer and the amount
workers want to accept at prevailing wage
rates and prices. Forty years ago theorists
with confidence in markets could believe
that full employment is whatever volume
of employment the economy is moving
toward, and that its achievement requires
of the government nothing more than
neutrality, and nothing less
After Keynes challenged the classical
notion of labor market equilibrium and
the complacent view of policy to which it
led, full employment came to mean max;-
mum aggregate supply, the point at which
expansion of aggregate demand could not
further increase employment and output.
Full employment was also regarded as
the economy's inflation threshold. With a
deflationary gap, demand less than full
employment supply, prices would be declining
or at worst constant. Expansion of
aggregate demand short of full employment
would cause at most a one-shot