response to incentives that cannot be overlooked
in policy formulation, combined with the evidence
on the erratic and arbitrary nature of incentives
provided by trade regimes, forced a
reexamination of the premises on which importsubstitution
policies were based.
Yet another contribution of empirical research
was to focus upon the actual workings
of policy implementation. In early policy prescriptions,
there had been something of a naive
tendency to assume that enunciating a desired
outcome was itself sufficient to achieve it.
This naivete was dispelled, as the theories regarding
bureaucratic behavior, rent-seeking,
smuggling, and overinvoicing and underinvoicing
all enabled observers to examine more
critically the ways in which alternative policy
prescriptions might have side effects that had
earlier been unanticipated.
B. Refinement and More Appropriate
Interpretation of Theory
As already seen, some of the intellectual underpinning
of import-substitution policies was
provided by inappropriate interpretation of
theory, or the failure of theory to take into account
key institutional or behavioral variables.
Analytical developments focussing on conditions
under which these interpretations were
valid, or examining the ways in which results
had to be modified to take into account these
institutional and behaviorial aspects, were
clearly important in improving understanding.
The entire literature on optimal interventions
in the presence of domestic distortions is
one important example of a demonstration that
earlier interpretations of theory had failed to
examine the relevant alternatives. It was invaluable
in demonstrating clearly that in most
circumstances, the presence of a distortion
warranted a first-best policy intervention other
than a tariff.43 For example, in the case of
Hagen's (1958) employment-generating case
for protection, the optimal intervention literature
demonstrated clearly that a first-best intervention
would be in the labor market, and
that a tariff or quota could not achieve a firstbest
outcome.
Similarly, developments showing that the
comparative advantage results were not the
simple "specialize forever in primary products"
precept proved significant in enabling
policy makers to contemplate alteration in
trade strategy. Baldwin's (1969) critical examination
of the infant industry argument provides
yet another example of an analytical
contribution that was important in making
those concerned with policy consider carefully
the effectiveness of the policies they had
adopted in achieving their desired goals.
Finally, there was theory that was developed
in response to the functioning of importsubstitution
regimes. Here again, the theory of
rent-seeking, as it pointed to the ways in which
bureaucrats and others made protection very
costly, was important. Further, when it was
recognized that bureaucrats, businessmen, and
others attempted to capture or thwart policy
initiatives not in their self-interest and that
they acquired an interest in maintaining the
system, once established, and that resources
were expended in operating the system, it had
to be recognized that changing the system
would be politically difficult.
Development of a better understanding of
the incentives for underinvoicing and overinvoicing
of exports and imports and for smuggling
under exchange-control regimes worked
in the same direction: not only could these activities
prove costly to the exchequer and in
terms of resource drains, but the very recognition
of their presence served to remind
policy makers of the limitations of their
instruments.
Finally, good analyses demonstrating how
individual import controls actually worked
contributed to understanding and made empirical
work more effective. The further
refinement of theory showing tariff-quota
equivalence has already been mentioned.
Rent-seeking again comes to mind. But, in
addition, individual mechanisms for encouraging
import substitution each had their
own, often idiosyncratic, incentive effects. A
good example is Gene Grossman's (1981)
classic analysis of domestic content regulations
and their effects.
" However, those advocating import substitution
seized upon the infeasibility of first-best policy as a defense
for following the policies they wished in any event
to follow.