examples. Some consumers are slow learners,
however, and many markets are inconsistent
teachers, providing more irritation than illumination,
giving random awards and punishments
that consumers cannot always translate into accurate
road maps for successful behavior. Even
if consumers do learn from experience, remember
P. T. Barnum's comment that "there is a
fool born every minute," additional mugs for
the market game. Importantly, the sting of market
punishment breeds agoraphobia. Just as
children humiliated in the classroom may be
turned off rather than educated, consumers humiliated
in the marketplace may develop an
aversion to markets, where opportunities for
choice may be interpreted as opportunities for
mistakes, embarrassment, and regret.
A. Memory and Perceptions
There are now extensive experiments and
insights from cognitive psychology showing
that memory is imperfect and perceptions are
often biased and statistically flawed (for detailed
surveys see Matthew Rabin, 1998; McFadden,
1999). Consider, first, factual and
affective memory. Our memories guide our perceptions
of alternatives and our preferences, and
imperfections in remembering facts and sensations
can distort our perspective, leading to inconsistent
behavior and disappointment. Table
1 summarizes some of these effects; I will comment
on how they can lead to suboptimal market
outcomes.

What we store and retrieve from memory
is affected by mood and emotion. Laura
Carstensen (Susan M. Charles et al., 2003;
James J. Gross et al., 1997) finds that advertisements
are remembered better, and influence
choice more, when the affective content of the
ad matches the mood of the consumer. George
Loewenstein (1996) finds that emotional sensations
are more easily remembered than nonemotional
ones, but emotions themselves are
difficult to retrieve from memory-we remember
experiencing episodes of pleasure or pain,
and these memories can powerfully condition
our behavior-"once burned, twice shy"-but
we fortunately cannot relive the experiences in
their original intensity.
Finding and retrieving information from
memory is a complex cognitive task. The answer
may be on the tip of your tongue, but
sometimes the tip of your tongue is hard to find.
We use contemporary cues to guide memory
search, and to fill in and bluff when memory
fails. Consequently, what we remember is influenced
substantially by current context and
mood, and these are vulnerable to manipulation
in the presentation of choice alternatives.
Selective memory is the phenomenon in
which we remember what draws our attention.
Coincidences stick in our minds, noncoincidences
are forgotten. This influences probability
judgments. A good example is the belief in the
"hot hand" in athletics, the idea that players can
get in the groove for some period of time and
play consistently above their game. Objectively,
the hot-hand phenomenon does not exist-the
observed distribution of runs of success is consistent
with independent Bernoulli trials, not
with heterogeneous spurts and slumps. The explanation
is that long runs are coincidences that
are selectively remembered. One of the implications
of selective memory for market behavior
is that people build up elaborate and
complex beliefs about causal relationships between
events, taking natural events personally,