raising measured productivity should be
brought into balance with our interest in
other welfare goals. But our budgetary process,
in spite of improvements in recent
years, remains weak. Tolerance for deficits
is the overt, inflation is the covert, mode by
which competing claims are reconciled. For
lack of a systematic way of facing the future
costs of present acts, three-quarters of the
budget consists of "uncontrollable" items.
Capital investment is not distinguished from
current consumption. We have just begun to
recognize that regulatory acts impose private
costs of compliance, analogous to excise
taxes, which must somehow be brought
within the budgetary ambit of the public
household.
A second matter is what, by pleasant euphemism,
is called our system of local
government. Fractionated geographically
and functionally and poorly coordinated,
operating in a confused relation to the
federal government, plagued by financial
crisis reflecting in part the disjunction between
the populations they serve and the tax
bases on which they rest, our towns, cities,
and districts are fertile generators of external
costs, duplicative and costly regulation,
and chronic neglect. If, as historians generally
agree, Britain could not have carried
through its Industrial Revolution without
the great Victorian reforms of local government,
we ought to be asking whether we can
meet the emerging problems of growth and
welfare in the second half century of our
mixed economy without also facing up to
the need for systematic local government
reform.
The third matter is both basic and diffuse,
and that is the weakness of our party system.
It is a commonplace that our national
parties are no more than fluid, transistory,
and undisciplined coalitions of regional
and economic interest groupings. Their lack
of central organization and authority, reflecting
the size and diversity of the country
and people, and our lack of ideological
commitment, lays us wide open to the distorting
influence of special-interest lobbies
and single issue politics. In our political life,
we are all too vulnerable to particularistic
pressures and all too resistant to the needs
of general interest legislation.
Ix
The rationale supporting the development
of our mixed economy sees it as a pragmatic
compromise between the competing virtues
and defects of decentralized market capitalism
and encompassing socialism. Its goal
is to obtain a measure of distributive justice,
security, and social guidance of economic
life without losing too much of the allocative
efficiency and dynamism of private enterprise
and market organization. And it is a
pragmatic compromise in another sense. It
seeks to retain for most people that measure
of personal protection from the state which
private property and a private job market
confer, while obtaining for the disadvantaged
minority of people through the state
that measure of support without which their
lack of property or personal endowment
would amount to a denial of individual freedom
and capacity to function as full members
of the community.
The viability, to say nothing of the success,
of this compromise demands a rough, threecornered
balance between the degree to
which we look for economic progress
through the development of our powers of
production by private action, the degree to
which we try through government to protect
and promote those aspects of production
which markets do not reach, and the degree
to which we use governments to alter and
cushion the market's income verdicts and to
resolve the social conflicts which are inherent
in growth and change. Until recently, we
have paid inadequate attention to the requirements
of achieving that balance wisely.
We were able to neglect the problem because
we enjoyed the amplitude of a run of
fortunate years, when rapid and steady
growth was the unseen moderator of the
tensions of balance. In the new and less
favorable environment of growth, however,
the tensions between productivity and the
alternative dimensions of welfare are aggravated
and the problems of balance-of
how much to do and how to do it- are
more severe.
In the last analysis, values- feelings,
tastes, and sympathies- control choices. But
those feelings and sympathies should not