value of output, and in the United States
this is practically the same thing as to say
that we are concerned here with a Residual
observed as a proportion of the privately
produced output.22 The procedure has the
implication that the analysis of the determinants
of technological progress is as
yet in a tentative stage, so that if for example
R & D, the increase of per capita
education, the extra-inputs needed for
industrial changeovers, and some other
items to be discussed in this paper make up
the identifiable progress-inputs (as I
suggest they do), we cannot at present
expect good results from regressing output
on all these specific inputs along with the
conventional inputs specified in the production
functions. I feel convinced that
realism does require recognizing this limitation
but that this does not mean that we
are left with no good argument for relating
the Residual to the inputs and costs I
defined as progress-generating.
Regression analysis of cross-sections of
individual industry groups and of firms
enabled investigators to obtain confirmation
of the hypothesis that productivityincreases,
as estimated by the method of
the Residual, are positively correlated with
R & D-intensity.23 On the other hand,
spillover effects from the public into the
private sector, the diffusion of knowledge
within the private sector, and the narrowness
of the concept of R & D-intensity
as compared to our concept of progressgenerating
input make it desirable to ask
the question of the relationship of the
Residual to progress-inputs also in broader
intertemporal terms. When the question is
so posed, it calls for exploring whether the
time-sequence of productivity increases, as
measured by the Residual, bears an understandable
relation to the time-sequence
of progress-generating inputs. We shall see
that this is indeed the case, but in such
work there is at present only limited room
for regression analysis and for "testing" in
the technical sense. This is because for
some purposes for which time-sequence
comparisons of productivity increase with
inputs are used it is advisable to rely on a
rather small number of typical values of
the variables for successive periods of
considerable duration; high serial correlation
and lags reduce the usefulness of data
reflecting yearly changes.24 Emphasis will
22 However, the base in relation to which the pro-  ductivity-increase is measured is somewhat inflated as a  result of the fact that the private sector includes some
activities for which no productivity-increase can be
measured (such as the activities of private nonprofit
organizations, and paid household work); and it includes
some activities for which the output indices
actually used do not measure productivity-increases
adequately. A minor terminological awkwardness to be  noted here is that government-enterprise, in contrast to
general government, belongs in the "private" sector
See also fn. 33.
23 Kendrick (pp. 182-186) has found a statistically  significant correlation between the increase in his total
factor productivity and the "R & D-intensity" of  specific industry groups. His discussion of this problem  is based partly on his own research and partly on that of
Nestor Terlecky.
Jora Minasian in his May 1969 article, and in his
earlier work there quoted, reports on a positive re-  lationship between R & D and productivity-increase in
a cross-section of chemical firms. He regressed Value
Added on labor, capital and R & D. His estimate of the
rates of return from R & D disregards a substantial  proportion of the progress-costs with which we shall be  concerned in this paper, but what matters here is the
existence of a positive relationship between R & D and
productivity-increase. However, the fact that on the
cost-side merely R & D enters into Minasian's analysis  when he estimates rates of return may provide part of
the explanation why these rates are hard to reconcile
with the results of a survey (questionnaire study) on
which Edwin Mansfield reported also in the May 1969
Papers and Proceedings. Firms must be acutely aware
of the changeover costs and of various other costs to
be considered in our analysis.
24 This, however, is not all "black and white." For  example, regression analysis based on yearly data is not  useless when it comes to examining the question whether  in the United States the rate of increase of productivity
has been rising.  Testing the upward tendency of the rate of produc-  tivity increases (semi-logarithmic nonlinearity) with  yearly data is of interest only for the period following
1919 (or conceivably for a period ending in 1919).
Kendrick has shown conclusively that if one decides to  limit oneself to semi-logarithmically linear relations of  productivity to time (i.e., of the logarithm of productherefore