economics, objected to the casual ways of
these folks. New Classical critics of Keynesian
economics insisted instead that these relations
be derived from fundamentals. They said that
macroeconomic relationships should be derived
from profit-maximizing by firms and from utilitymaximizing
by consumers with economic arguments
in their utility functions.
The new methodology had a profound effect
on macroeconomics. Five separate neutrality results
overturned aspects of macroeconomics
that Keynesians had previously considered incontestable.
These five neutralities are: the independence
of consumption and current income
(the life-cycle permanent income hypothesis);
the irrelevance of current profits to investment
spending (the Modigliani-Miller theorem); the
long-run independence of inflation and unemployment
(natural rate theory); the inability of
monetary policy to stabilize output (the rational
expectations hypothesis); and the irrelevance of
taxes and budget deficits to consumption (Ricardian
equivalence).6 These results fly in the face
of Keynesian economics. They undermine its
conclusions about the behavior of the economy
and the impact of stabilization policy.
The discovery of these five neutrality propositions
surprised macroeconomists. They had
not suspected that radically anti-Keynesian conclusions
were the logical outcome of such seemingly
innocuous maximizing assumptions.
I. Neutralities and Preferences
How did macroeconomists react to the discovery
of the five neutralities? On the one hand,
the New Classical economists viewed their neutrality
results as a telltale: that Keynesian economists
of the previous generation had been
thinking in the wrong way. In their view, scientific
reasoning was producing a new, leaner,
more precise economics.
On the other hand, Keynesian economists, for
the most part, reacted differently. In due course
they came to view the neutralities as logically
impeccable. These New Keynesians accepted
the methodological dictums of the New Classical
economics: that constrained maximization
of profit and utility functions is the appropriate
microfoundation for macroeconomics. They
also viewed the neutralities as having a certain
sort of generality. The neutralities do commonly
describe equilibria of competitive economies
with complete information, irrespective of people'
s preferences-as long as those preferences
correspond to economists' typical descriptions
of them. The Keynesians then resurrected somebut
not all-of the Keynesian conclusions by adding
a variety of frictions to the New Classical
model. Those frictions include credit constraints,
market imperfections, information failures, tax
distortions, staggered contracts, uncertainty,
menu costs, and bounded rationality. This formulation
preserves many (but not all) Keynesian
conclusions regarding cyclical fluctuations and
macroeconomic policy.
This lecture will suggest a new stance in
regard to each of the five neutralities. Like New
Classical and New Keynesian economics, it will
derive behavior from utility and profit maximization.
That captures the purposefulness of economic
decisions. But this lecture will also
question the generality of the preferences that
lead to the five neutralities. There is a sense in
which those preferences are very narrowly defined.
They have important missing motivation-
since they fail to incorporate the norms of
the decision makers. Those norms reflect how
the respective decision makers think they and
others should or should not behave, even in the
absence of frictions. Preferences reflecting such
norms yield a macroeconomics with important
remnants of the early Keynesian thinking. They
also yield a macroeconomics that, in important
details, cannot be obtained only with frictions.
We shall see that, with such preferences, even
in the absence of frictions, each of the five
neutralities will be systematically violated. Specifically:

* A realistic norm regarding consumption behavior
will make consumption directly dependent
on current income, in violation of the
neutrality of consumption given wealth;
* A realistic norm will make investment directly
dependent on cash flow, in violation of
Modigliani-Miller;
* A realistic norm will make wages and prices
dependent on nominal considerations and
thus violate natural rate theory;  6 Of course, it took some time for the implications of  these neutrality results to be fully appreciated. For example,  life-cycle consumption and Modigliani-Miller were initially  considered as nothing more than useful codicils to Keynesian
thinking.