skyscrapers, or the value of California real
estate. Most of us worked outdoors; life
expectancy was 47 years (it is now 75); barely
a fifth of us lived in cities of 50,000 or more.
Anticipating the automobile, we might have
been concerned with whether wetter and
drier seasons would bring more or less mud,
not anticipating that the nation's roads would
become thoroughly paved. The assessment
of effects on health would be without antibiotics
or inoculation. And in contrast to
most contemporary concern with the popular
image of hotter summers to come, I
think we would have been more concerned
about warmer winters, later frost in autumn,
and earlier thaw in the spring.
If the world, both North America and the
other continents, is going to change as much
in the next 90 years as it has changed in the
90 just past, we are going to be hard put to
imagine the effects of climate changes.
Another thought experiment: suppose the
kind of climate change expected between
now and, say, 2080 had already taken place
since 1900. Ask somebody 50, 60, or 80
years old what is different compared with
when he or she was a child. Would the
climate change be noticed? Even ask a 70-
year-old farm couple living on the same
farm where they were born: would the
change in climate be among the most dramatic
changes in either their farming or
their lifestyle? I expect changing from horses
to tractors and from kerosene to electricity,
the arrival of the telephone and the automobile
and the paving of roads, the development
of pesticides and artificial fertilizer,
the discovery of soy beans and the development
of hybrid corn, and even improvements
in outdoor clothing, veterinary
medicine, and agricultural practices generally
would swamp the climate change. And
if instead of living and working conditions
we inquire about changes in wildlife and
natural ecosystems, changes in regional climates
would have been competing, in their
impact on nature, with population growth
and economic development.
A conclusion we might reach is that a
climate change would have appeared to
make a vastly greater difference to the way
people lived and earned their living in 1900
than to the way people live and earn their
living today. Today very little of our gross
domestic product is produced outdoors, susceptible
to climate. Agriculture and forestry
account for less than 3 percent of GDP, and
little else is much affected. Some activities
-tourism and holidays, professional sports,
and school teaching-are seasonal, but
many of the seasonalities are conventions
that reflect the influence of climate in earlier
times. (Children were needed in the
fields in summer and could start school when
the harvest was in; hockey and basketball
used to be winter sports because one depended
on ice and the other could fit in a
building.)'
Manufacturing rarely depends on climate,
and where temperature and humidity used
to make a difference, air conditioning has
intervened. When Toyota chooses among
Ohio, Alabama, and Southern California for
locating an automobile assembly, geographical
considerations are important, but not
because of climate. Minerals are extracted
where they happen to occur, and oil fields
and coal mines inhabit all kinds of climates
and are little affected. The U.S. Postal Service'
s vow that neither snow nor rain nor
heat nor gloom of night will "stay these
couriers from the swift completion of their
appointed rounds" sounds quaint in the era
of e-mail and fax.
Finance is little affected by climate; similarly
for health care, or education, or broadcasting.
Transportation can be affected, but
improvements in all-weather landing and
take-off in the last 30 years are greater than
any differences that climate makes. If the
average effect is a warming, iced waterways
and snow removal may decline in importance.
Construction is affected, mainly by
cold, and if the average effect is in the
direction of warming, construction may benefit
slightly.
It is really agriculture that is affected. But
even if agricultural productivity declined by
a third over the next half century, the per
1An imaginative discussion is in Jesse H. Ausubel
(1991).