Investment was limited by the more binding
of two linear constraints: the available savings
and the available foreign exchange. There
were thus two "gaps" -between savings and
investment, and between demand for, and
supply of, foreign exchange. Growth was
constrained either by savings or by foreign
exchange availability, and the model demonstrated
the high potential productivity of foreign
aid (in providing foreign exchange),
enabling otherwise redundant domestic savings
to be used in capital formation. The
model, reflecting the views of the day, had little
role for the price mechanism.26
An example of an analytical effort to clarify
circumstances under which one of the stylized
facts could be realized was Bhagwati's ( 1958)
and Harry G. Johnson's (1967) demonstration
of the possibility of "immiserizing growth,"
under which a country might increase its output,
only to find the price of exports falling so
much that the country was worse off. As
Bhagwati showed, the conditions under which
that might happen were fairly extreme.
An important development was the theory
of shadow pricing, which was an offshoot of
programming and planning models. It was initially
used to demonstrate how reliance on
market prices might yield an inappropriate resource
allocation. Quickly, however, analysts
pointed to the distortions between domestic
prices of import-competing and exportable
goods because of the trade regime. There is
little doubt that cost-benefit techniques improved
project selection and enabled improved
governmental decision-making with, inter alia,
the insistence on use of border prices. The
publication of the I. M. D. Little and James A.
Mirrlees (1969) volume marked a milestone,
after which there was almost no question about
the appropriateness of using border prices in
project evaluation.
In a related and important development, the
theory of effective protection was developed
by Johnson (1965a), W. M. Corden (1966),
Bela Balassa (1965), and others, providing a
framework for analyzing the protection accorded
to industries engaged in light processing
and much higher value-added activities on
a comparable basis. The notion of domestic
resource costs (Bruno, 1965; Krueger, 1966),
showing the uneven allocation of resources to
earning and saving a unit of foreign exchange
across activities, was developed to meet the
argument that market prices failed to reflect
opportunity cost. This research provided a tool
with which economists could measure the
wide disparities in protection accorded to different
import-competing industries.
Recognizing that these estimates were based
in part on partial equilibrium analysis,27 a
number of researchers began work on developing
techniques for computing general equilibrium
results. Based on newly developed
solution algorithms, techniques were developed
for models which endogenized prices,
and thus moved away from the linear models
earlier used for analysis.28
By the late 1960's and 1970's, there were significant
contributions which undermined some
of the premises on which import-substitution
strategies were based. At an analytical level,
one line of research focussed on whether the
stylized facts of "market failure" in fact warranted
the imposition of trade restrictions.
Bhagwati and V. K. Ramaswami (1963),
Johnson (1965b), Bhagwati (1969), and others
demonstrated that a trade instrument (tariff
or quota) was usually not a first-best, nor often
even second-best, instrument for achieving the
objectives in the name of which protection had
been granted. The equivalence of tariffs and
quotas, an old result in international economics,
was revised and refined, as quotas became
more frequently used.29
Research also began analyzing other aspects
of the ways in which protection actually
worked. Here, attention focussed on rentseeking
(Krueger, 1974) as a by-product of
protection (and, indeed, as a user of resources
26 See Ronald I. McKinnon (1966), who provided the
first demonstration of this important proposition at the  time.  27 They did not, in principle, have to be partial equilibrium
estimates if shadow prices were known and used
in calculations. In practice, however, that was seldom
feasible.
28 For an exposition of the development of these models
into the 1970's, see Kemal Dervis et al. (1982).  29 See the survey in Bhagwati (1969).