Bank of New York has expressed concern
that the habits of central bank cooperation
and U.S. official intimacy with the workings
of the foreign-exchange market that have
been built up over thirty years are being
squandered for ideological reasons (Scott
Pardee, 1964, p. 2).
Regimes are clearly more attractive in
political terms than hegemony, or even than
leadership with its overtones of the German
Fuhrerprinzip or of Italy's II Duce, if not
necessarily more so than responsibility. Polycentralism,
pluralism, cooperation, equality,
partnership, decoupling, self-reliance, and
autonomy all have resonance. But it is hard
to accept the view, so appealing to the political
right, that the path to achieve cooperation
is a tit-for-tat strategy, applied in a
repetitive game, that teaches the other player
or players to cooperate (Robert Axelrod,
1984). As Tibor Scitovsky demonstrated years
ago (1937), this path can readily end by
wiping out trade altogether. Hierarchical
arrangements are being examined by economic
theorists studying the organization of
firms, but for less cosmic purposes than
would be served by political and economic
organization of the production of international
public goods (Raj Sah and Joseph
Stiglitz, 1985).
Minding one's own business-operating in
the robust zone of indifference-is a sound
rule on trend when macroeconomic variables
are more or less stable. To the economist it
means reliance on the market to the extent
that the conditions for a Pareto optimum
solution are broadly met. But the fallacy of
composition remains a threat, and one cannot
count on the Categorical Imperative.
Markets work most of the time, as a positivesum
game in which the gain for one does not
imply a loss for another. Experience teaches,
however, that crises may arise. When they
do, the rule changes from government and
public indifference to the production of public
goods by leadership or by a standby
regime.
Leadership or responsibility limited to
crises encounters another problem: how to
keep the machinery for handling crises from
obsolescence. In crisis one needs forceful and
intelligent people, capable of making decisions
with speed under pressure. It is
sometimes said that the Japanese practice of
decision by consensus with ideas coming up
from below, makes it hard for that country
to discharge in timely fashion the responsibilities
of world leadership. In Marcus
Goodrich's Delilah (1941), the amiable practice
of fraternization between a watch officer
and enlisted men on the bridge of the destroyer
proved dangerous in a typhoon since
the men had fallen into the habit of discussing
the officer's orders. The paradox is that
the attributes needed in crisis tend to atrophy
in quiet times; for example in the control
room of a Three Mile Island nuclear power
plant.
Let me conclude by emphasizing once
again my concern that politicians, economists,
and political scientists may come to
believe that the system should be run at
all times by rules, including regimes, not people.
Rules are desirable on trend. In crisis
the need is for decision. I quote once more
the letter of Sir Robert Peel of June 1844
a propos of the Bank Charter Act of that
year:
My Confidence is unshaken that we
have taken all the Precautions which
Legislation can prudently take against
the Recurrence of a pecuniary Crisis. It
may occur in spite of our Precautions;
and if it be necessary to assume a grave
Responsibility, I dare say Men will be
found willing to assume such a Responsibility.

[Parliamentary Papers,
1857, 1969, p. xxix]