is past when the best that could be done
with large sets of variables was to reduce
their number by averaging them out or
what is essentially the same, combining
them into broad aggregates; now we can
manipulate complicated analytical systems
without suppressing the identity of
their individual elements. There is a
certain irony in the fact that, next to the
fast-growing service industries, the areas
whose coverage by the Census is particularly
deficient are the operations of
government agencies, both federal and
local.
To place all or even the major responsibility
for the collection of economic data
in the hands of one central organization
would be a mistake. The prevailing decentralized
approach that permits and
encourages a great number of government
agencies, non-profit institutions and private
businesses engaged in data gathering
activities acquitted itself very well. Better
information means more detailed information
and detailed specialized information
can be best collected by those immediately
concerned with a particular field. What is,
however, urgently needed is the establishment,
maintenance and enforcement of
coordinated uniform classification systems
by all agencies, private as well as public,
involved in this work. Incompatible data
are useless data. How far from a tolerable,
not to say, ideal state our present economic
statistics are in this respect, can be judged
by the fact that because of differences in
classification, domestic output data cannot
be compared, for many goods, with the
corresponding export and import figures.
Neither can the official employment statistics
be related without laborious adjustments
to output data, industry by industry.
An unreasonably high proportion
of material and intellectual resources devoted
to statistical work is now spent not
on the collection of primary information
but on a frustrating and wasteful struggle
with incongruous definitions and irreconcilable
classifications.
Without invoking a misplaced methodological
analogy, the task of securing a
massive flow of primary economic data can
be compared to that of providing the high
energy physicists with a gigantic accelerator.
The scientists have their machines
while the economists are still waiting for
their data. In our case not only must the
society be willing to provide year after
year the millions of dollars required for
maintenance of a vast statistical machine,
but a large number of citizens must be prepared
to play, at least, a passive and occasionally
even an active part in actual
fact-finding operations. It is as if the electrons
and protons had to be persuaded to
cooperate with the physicist.
The average American does not seem to
object to being interviewed, polled, and
surveyed. Curiosity, the desire to find out
how the economic system (in which most of
us are small gears, and some, big wheels)
works might in many instances provide
sufficient inducement for cooperation of
this kind.
One runs up, of course, occasionally
against the attitude that "what you don't
know can't hurt you" and that knowledge
might be dangerous: it may generate a
desire to tinker with the system. The
experience of these years seems, however,
to have convinced not only most economists-
with a few notable exceptions-but
also the public at large that a lack of
economic knowledge can hurt badly. Our
free enterprise system has rightly been
compared to a gigantic computing machine
capable of solving its own problems automatically.
But any one who has had some
practical experience with large computers
knows that they do break down and can't
operate unattended. To keep the automatic,
or rather the semi-automatic, engine
of our economy in good working order we
must not only understand the general