nonhistorical exercise, in which different
price levels are to be viewed as alternative
rather th bn sequential. Compare two
situations that differ only in the scale of
exogenous monetary variables; imagine,
for example, that all such magnitudes are
ten times as high in one situation as in the
other. All equilibrium prices, including
money wage rates, should differ in the
same proportion, while all real magnitudes,
including employment, should be the same
in the two equilibria. To assume instead
that workers' supply decisions vary with
the price level is to say that they would
behave differently if the unit of account
were, and always had been, dimes instead
of dollars. Surely Keynes should not be
interpreted to attribute to anyone money
illusion in this sense. He was not talking
about so strict and static an equilibrium.
Axel Leijonhufvud's illuminating and
perceptive interpretation of Keynes argues
convincingly that, in chapter 1 as throughout
the General Theory, what Keynes calls
equilibrium should be viewed as persistent
disequilibrium, and what appears to be
comparative statics is really shrewd and
incisive, if awkward, dynamic analysis.
Involuntary unemployment means that
labor markets are not in equilibrium. The
resistance of money wage rates to excess
supply is a feature of the adjustment process
rather than a symptom of irrationality.


The other side of Keynes's story is that
in depressions money wage deflation, even
if it occurred more speedily, or especially
if it occurred more speedily, would be at
best a weak equilibrator and quite possibly
a source of more unemployment rather
than less. In contemporary language, the
perverse case would arise if a high and
ever-increasing real rate of return on
money inhibited real demand faster than
the rising purchasing power of monetary
stocks stimulated demand. To pursue this
Keynesian theme further here would be a
digression.

What relevance has this excursion into
depression economics for contemporary
problems of unemployment and wage inflation?
The issues are remarkably similar,
even though events and Phillips have
shifted attention from levels to time rates
of change of wages and prices. Phillips
curve doctrine2 is in an important sense
the postwar analogue of Keynesian wage
and employment theory, while natural
rate doctrine is the contemporary version
of the classical position Keynes was opposing.


Phillips curve doctrine implies that
lower unemployment can be purchased at
the cost of faster inflation. Let us adapt
Keynes's test for involuntary unemployment
to the dynamic terms of contemporary
discussion of inflation, wages, and
unemployment. Suppose that the current
rate of unemployment continues. Associated
with it is a path of real wages,
rising at the rate of productivity growth.
Consider an alternative future, with unemployment
at first declining to a rate one
percentage point lower and then remaining
constant at the lower rate. Associated
with the lower unemployment alternative
will be a second path of real wages. Eventually
this real wage path will show, at
least to first approximation, the same rate
of increase as the first one, the rate of
productivity growth. But the paths may
differ because of the transitional effects of
increasing the rate of employment. The
growth of real wages will be retarded in
the short run if additional employment
lowers labor's marginal productivity. In
any case, the test question is whether with
full information about the two alternatives
labor would accept the second onewhether,