regarding the desirability of the distributional
changes and might also differ in the weights
they give to the changes in efficiency versus
the distributional consequences.
Second, greater openness about value differences
should force economists to make explicit
the positive questions that are embedded
in most policy-value questions. This would
point the way to productive research. If the
embedded questions are identified and studied,
it should be possible to reduce the uncertainty
about them and thus provide a basis for narrowing
differences on policy-value questions.
A third agenda item for economists is to undertake
research on the formation of values,
especially insofar as they are the consequences
of policy. Economists are understandably reluctant
to prescribe values or to make normative
judgments about them. But when
economic policies affect values and preferences,
and these in turn affect behavior, it is
incumbent on economists to analyze the links
between policies and values, and to examine
the economic and social consequences of alternative
value systems. I believe there is an
analogy between the economics of values and
the economics of technology. Over the past
several decades some economists have begun
to treat technology as at least partly endogenous.
4" Now, a similar effort must be undertaken
for values (Henry J. Aaron, 1994;
Becker, 1996; Albert 0. Hirschman, 1986;
Assar Lindbeck, 1994).
Finally, economists must develop more selfawareness
of how our values color our judgment
about policy, and more candor in making
clear to others the respective roles of positive
research and of values in our policy recommendations.
Alice M. Rivlin, in her AEA presidential
address in December 1986, warned
economists against letting "their ideological
position cloud their judgment about the likely
effects of particular policies" (p. 4). She
urged us "... to be more careful to sort out, for
ourselves and others, what we really know
from our ideological biases" (p. 9). In my
view, there is a vast difference between a researcher
and a reformer, between an analyst
and a player in the policy arena. They are all
socially valuable occupations, and the same
individual may successfully wear different
hats at different times. What is not likely to
work well, either for economics or for policy,
is trying to wear two hats at the same time.
In the remainder of this paper I present a
summary of my policy recommendations for
health system reform. The use of the bully pulpit
by an AEA president to push personal policy
choices has ample precedent, but I also
want to use this opportunity to show how those
choices are shaped by the interaction between
my values and my understanding of health
economics. Finally, I identify aspects of my
policy recommendations that are problematic
and which would clearly benefit from additional
research.
My three major recommendations are:
(i) a broad-based tax earmarked for health
care to provide every American with a
voucher for participation in a basic plan;
(ii) provision of care through integrated health
systems that include hospitals, physician
services, and prescription drugs. These
systems would be led by physicians, would
be reimbursed by capitation plus modest
co-payment from patients at the time of
use, and would be required to offer a wide
variety of point-of-service options to be
paid for by patients with after-tax dollars;
(iii) a large private center for technology assessment
financed by a small industrywide
levy on all health care spending.
My desire to see all Americans insured for
a basic health plan is clearly driven in part by
values. Although medical care is often not a
crucial factor in health outcomes, it is nearly
always a source of utility through its caring
and validation functions. In my judgment, it
fully meets Adam Smith's 1776 definition of
a necessary: "By necessaries I understand not
only the commodities which are indispensably
necessary for the support of life but whatever
the custom of the country renders it indecent
for creditable people, even of the lowest order,
to be without" (1776; republished 1937 p.
821). To achieve universal coverage there
must be subsidization for those who are too
4' For example, Kenneth Arrow, Zvi Griliches, Ed
Mansfield, Richard Nelson, Nathan Rosenberg, and Jacob
Schmookler.