true neoclassical spirit is being denied in
such a model. Although we are not usually
explicit about it, we really postulate that
when a market could be created, it will be.
I sometimes think that welfare economics
ought to be considered an empirical discipline.
Implicitly, if an opportunity for a
Pareto improvement exists, then there will
be an effort to achieve it though some social
device or another. In our theories and
to a considerable extent in practice, the
cheapest way in many cases is the creation
of a market; and markets do emerge. If a
market is impractical for one or another of
the reasons we usually call "market failure,
" then very likely some other social
device will at least be tried: government
intervention; codes of professional ethics;
or economic organizations with some
power intermediate between the competitive
firm and the government.
Thus, the failure of markets for future
goods must be regarded as an analytic
problem as well as a presupposition. It
seems to me there are two basic causal factors.
One is that contracts are not enforceable
without cost and forward contracts
are more costly to enforce than contemporaneous
contracts; the other is that because
of the many uncertainties about the
future, neither buyers nor sellers are willing
to make commitments which completely
define their future actions. Let me
take these two points up in turn.
The ability to make enforceable contracts
is a necessary but not sufficient
condition for a market. However, there is
no way to insure complete enforceability.
An individual may make a contract which
he cannot in fact fulfill. Penalties may indeed
be imposed on failure to live up to
one's agreement, but they are not a substitute
for compliance from the viewpoint
of the other party, and there is always a
degree of cost in enforcing the penalties.
The laws of bankruptcy are a social recognition
that complete enforceability is impossible
and that it is even socially desirable
to set limits on the penalties for
failure. However, when the exchange of
values for values is simultaneous or nearly
so, the contracts may almost be selfenforcing.
If a good has been sold and not
paid for, it can be recovered; if there is a
continuing relation of buyer and seller, a
failure to settle bills can be met by refusal
to make further deliveries, in which case
the loss is minimized. With contracts extending
into the distant future, on the
contrary, the possibility of failure to comply
becomes greater, partly because the
self-enforcement aspects become weaker,
partly because unexpected changes may
intervene to make even a sincerely intended
compliance difficult or impossible.
The outstanding examples of forward
contracts are credit instruments. The
buyer, who is taking the risks of default, is
motivated to protect himself by seeking
more information about the seller. The
lender wants to know the borrower's assets,
the prospects for changes in them,
possibly even what he is going to do with
the money. This very individualized information-
seeking relation is quite far
from the arm's length impersonal model of
a market. The so-called capital markets
are in many structural aspects very different
from our model markets. It is of
course an empirical question how far their
behavior departs from the model. But
the recurrent theme of credit rationing and
availability doctrines, the essential imperfections
of the credit market which underlie
monetarist theories of cyclical fluctuations
suggest that the incomplete enforceability
of credit contracts and the
protective steps taken by lenders are significant
factors in explaining the working
of the market.
While the enforceability question explains
why those forward contacts that are
made do not constitute a perfect market,
we need more to understand why even