some socially desirable investment opportunities
are not available to poor people. Here, too,
earnings differences are not fully equalizing on
educational costs. They manifest the effects of a
form of financial "noncompeting groups," as
well as the effects of true differences in costs
and talents.
The effects of equal educational opportunities
on the distribution of earnings depends on
interpersonal differences in talents, abilities,
and motivation on the one hand, and on the
importance of noncompeting groups and financial
barriers on the other. Econometricians have
assessed the "ability-bias" in estimated rates of
return to higher education. This work is best
interpreted in terms of a one-factor representation
of skill where individuals are essentially
rank ordered from most able to least able, or
according to absolute advantage. Then, if financial
barriers are not too negatively correlated
with ability, people with more education tend to
be more able than those with less, and the wage
difference between college and high-school
graduates is an upwardly biased estimate of
what noncollege graduates would have earned
had they gone to college. As a practical matter,
the estimates of bias typically are rather small.
The characteristics model enriches analysis by
allowing selection by comparative advantage
rather than absolute advantage. Here abilities
and talents have different values in different
labor-market pursuits.
For example, Robert Willis and I (1979)
modeled educational choice by combining traditional
human-capital ideas with the theory of
comparative advantage, and developed a
method to estimate the behavior determinants of
actual choices observed in the data. We found
that high-school and college graduates do indeed
have different comparative advantages
across skills that dominate the selection process.
Detailed analysis of the earnings patterns of
World War II veterans showed the usual result
that high-school graduates would not have
earned as much as those who actually chose to
get their college degrees. But we also discovered
that persons who subsequently gained college
degrees probably would have earned
relatively less as high-school graduates than
those who voluntarily discontinued their education
after high-school graduation. Positive selection
at both levels of school is inconsistent
with a simple rank-order interpretation or
single-factor model of ability. It is only consistent
with two or more dimensions of ability that
are negatively correlated across people. Comparative
advantage also accounts for why most
estimates of ability-bias interpreted as a single
factor (absolute advantage) are so small. Those
who leave school early do relatively well in
their pursuits so that simple cross-sectional estimates
are not much different from abilitycorrected
ones.
VI. Manufactured Inequality
The production of income is not deterministic.
Sometimes, random forces play an important
role in assigning earnings to individuals.
For example, some occupations are risky. The
arts come to mind, where only a few individuals
can support themselves on the earnings from
their trade. Musicians have very skewed earnings
distributions, but most young music students
who choose to enter the field understand
that there is only a small chance that they will
end up at the desired end of the distribution.
Somewhat counterintuitively, perhaps, the
variance in outcomes that is introduced by this
randomness can improve welfare. The idea is
rooted in early work by Milton Friedman (1953)
and examined again in a different context by
Theodore Bergstrom (1986). Indivisibilities
play a key role here. Most people live in one
and only one house. Area amenities enjoyed
depend on the location of the house and on
individuals' choices on location that are correlated
with income. For example, rich people
may choose to live in New York City rather
than in Kankakee, Illinois because there are
more ways to spend income in New York than
there are in Kankakee. Conversely, the life of a
poor person in Manhattan is difficult because
the amenities are expensive and tend to be targeted
toward high-income people. There is
complementarity in the utility function between
the quality of housing, in this case proxied by
urban amenities, and the level of consumption
of other goods. The situation is illustrated in
Figure 4.
A consumer may choose to live in a highquality
house, Zh, or a low-quality house, zl,
with corresponding house prices Ph and Pl- Because
of the complementarity in consumption