brain's primary center for recording pleasure,
and are active when we are involved in matters
of threat, trust, sex, and economic trade.' If you
have ever dismayed over convincing students
that economics is a sexy subject, you can now
tell them that shopping and sex share the same
neurotransmitters and receptors.
The linkages from physiological sensation to
conscious interpretation and reasoning may be
complex, and physiology alone may give an
incomplete picture, just as computer hardware
monitoring gives an incomplete picture of what
software is doing. Nevertheless, it should be
clear than any ability to measure directly in the
brain the impact of economic choice tasks on
reward pathways is potentially an immensely
powerful tool for linking economic activities
and consumer well-being.
How do organisms process sensations of
pleasure and pain? The answer goes directly to
the question of whether there is a single, abso-
lute physiological scale of well-being or utility,
and whether the organism consciously or un-
consciously acts out of self-interest to maximize
this quantity. First, both behavioral observation
and brain studies indicate that organisms seem
to be on a hedonic treadmill, quickly habituat-
ing to homeostasis, and experiencing pleasure
from gains and pain from losses relative to the
reference point that homeostasis defines (see
Sanfay et al., 2003). People quickly grow to
accept the city in which they are located, their
job, their mate, and their health status. They
may recognize and complain about unfavorable
absolute states, but their levels of satisfaction by
various measures are not nearly as differentiated
as they would have to be if their sensation of
well-being were experienced on an absolute scale.
Second, the picture that emerges from brain
studies is that the dopamine reward pathways in
the limbic region play a central role in experi-

encing pleasure, and also mitigate, with a lag,
the sensation of pain (see Becerra et al., 1999;
McClure et al., 2004). Adaptation to homeosta-
sis and differentiation between the pleasure and
pain circuits coincide with the powerful endow-
ment and loss aversion effects, and sensitivity to
framing and context, found in behavioral stud-
ies, and suggest that these phenomena are tied
fundamentally to brain structure. This is good
news and bad news for utilitarians: the limbic
system reward pathways record pleasure and
pain on what seems to be close to a utilitarian
scale, but brain circuitry processes experience
in ways that are not necessarily consistent with
relentless maximization of hedonic sensation.
One of the interesting bits of contemporary
biology has been the establishment for a variety
of species of simple direct links from particular
genes to the production of, and receptors for,
specific neurotransmitters, and from this to spe-
cific social behavior. One peptide, oxytocin, is
particularly involved in bonding and trust be-
tween animals, most notably between parents
and their offspring. This is relevant to econom-
ics because, in the words of Kenneth Arrow,
"every commercial transaction involves an ele-
ment of trust." In a study that strikes at the heart
of consumer sovereignty, Fehr et al. (2005) and
Michael Kosfield et al. (2005) administer oxy-
tocin or a placebo to subjects, and then ask them
to play the trust game. In this game, an investor
is given 100 MU. She has the option of placing
Y MU with an anonymous trustee, who through
the experimenter receives triple this amount.
The trustee then volunteers to send Z MU back
to the investor. The trustee's subgame is a dic-
tator game in which norms of fairness and rep-
utation matter, but the rational response in a
single-shot anonymous game is to return noth-
ing. By backward induction, the investor should
send nothing. In fact, both the investment and
the return are usually positive, with the level of
investment higher in subjects who are adminis-
tered the "trust" peptide oxytocin. Oxytocin has
no effect, however, on play of the dictator sub-
game, where trust does not matter. The conclu-
sion is that economic perceptions and decisions
are sensitive to brain chemistry, and susceptible
to chemical manipulation.
Neuroeconomics is a new subject, and the
future will determine its potential and limits for