belts to restore the economy to its normal
state of health.
It doesn't work that way. Savings are not
like a sack of potatoes which if not sold at
the current price will stay on hand and put
a downward pressure on the price until sold.
Savings not immediately taken up to create
capital simply vanish in reduced income,
without even exerting a downward pressure
on interest rates. If I yield to the allurements
of tax concessions to IRA's to the
point of not having my hair cut, this puts $8
more in my bank account, but $8 less in the
barber's account; there is nothing that makes
it any easier for anyone to obtain funds with
which to create capital, nor anything that
makes the prospect more attractive. As
Gertrude Stein remarked, "the money is
always there, it's the pockets that keep
changing." If the barber reacts by curtaling
his consumption, this further reduces national
income and saving. I may succeed in
my attempt to save, but only by reducing the
saving of others by even more. Savings are
an extremely perishable entity. Say's law
fails as soon as part of the income generated
in the process of producing the supply
is shunted off into savings that fail to get
converted into new capital goods.
On the other hand, if some genius invents
a new product or process and obtains a
credit or borrows the funds needed to finance
the capital involved in its production,
this added real wealth is, ipso facto, someone'
s saving. Instead of Say's law, we have
"capital formation creates its own saving."
Similarly, if the government borrows funds
created by credit expansion and recycles
them into purchasing power through outlays,
whether on current or capital account,
this creates both income out of which additional
savings will be attempted and demand
that may induce the private investment
to meet it.
Not all deficit financing, however, results
in recycling of savings, whether measured by
the current capriciously defined nominal
deficit or by a more rational definition involving
accounting for government assets.
We have seen that in a community relying
exclusively on a land tax, recycling does not
take place. Nor would the sale of the Pentagon,
or the purchase of an office building
currently being rented by the government,
offset by bond transactions, involve any
change in the level of recycling. Government
recycling is in principle the excess of those
government outlays that are regarded by
their recipients as income over those government
receipts that are regarded by their
payors as reductions in their disposable income.
Even this is subject to some caveats: if
government investment in a power plant, for
example, substitutes for investment that
would otherwise have been made by private
enterprise, there is no net recycling.
On the whole, however, recycling tends to
vary in rough correlation with the nominal
deficit, and the strength of the notion in the
minds of the public and their representatives
that deficits are bad and that the
"budget" should be balanced may make it
difficult to achieve an adequate level of
recycling. Some help in this respect may be
obtained by going to a capital budget system,
in which balance would be sought only
for the current-account part of the budget,
borrowing for the capital account being justified
by comparisons with corresponding
private practices and by the thought that
future generations being burdened with the
debt would also reap benefits from the capital
passed on to them. While this may constrain
choice away from what rational voters
would have chosen as the optimal level of
government capital formation, there would
seem to be sufficient scope for government
capital investment to provide sufficient recycling
to bring about full employment, particularly
if investments in education, research,
space exploration, and the like are considered
eligible for treatment as capital investment.
Some of these projects, even if they
would not stand scrutiny aside from their
function in justifying income recycling, may
nevertheless have the same kind of justification
as the building of the Egyptian pyramids
had for Keynes. On general welfare
grounds, one might well prefer recycling in
terms of borrowing to finance health care to
borrowing to finance space stations, but if
borrowing for health care is deemed to create
an ideologically sinful current-account
deficit, space stations it will have to be.