partly local and regional, culminates in the
powers of a national government.
Thus we begin with the households and
producing units of conventional economic
theory but immediately add government
as a third basic unit. Households, firms,
and government interact within a set of
evolving economic institutions. These eco-
nomic institutions include a hierarchy of
markets for current output and for the
services of labor, capital, and natural re-
sources, and an array of supporting insti-
tutions-from commercial banks to labor
mediators to government agencies-that
also make a contribution to total output.
Households and firms interact not only in
response to the standard market stimuli
but also by organizing pressure groups to
influence both government and particular
markets.
These pressure groups-not only labor
unions and trade associations but a wide
variety of other formal and informal
groups-operate within and are condi-
tioned by an evolving set of political and
legal institutions that lay down the ground
rules as to the way households, firms, and
government interact with each other. A
major aim of the pressure groups is to in-
fluence government and markets not only
directly but also by altering legal and po-
litical institutional arrangements. And as a
result of these pressures, the conditions
under which households and firms carry
out their economic functions change with
the passage of time-as do the ways in
which households and firms, through a
variety of forms of organization, seek to
change these conditions still further in
favor of their particular interests.21
We may speak of households, firms, and
government as the primary economic
agents which carry on their activities with-
in the framework of a set of evolving eco-
nomic institutions. But these agents and
economic institutions also interact with an
external environment which can be classi-
fied in a variety of ways. One simple clas-
sification might be: (1) the framework of
legal and political institutions, to which I
have already referred; (2) the complex of
social institutions that make up what may
loosely be referred to as the social environ-
ment; (3) the evolving body of scientific
and technical knowledge (and the institu-
tions through which such knowledge is de-
veloped and transmitted); (4) the physical
environment; and (5) the complex of po-
litical and economic arrangements that tie
a nation to the rest of the world.
Against this background, let us now
come back to my final question about the
evolving institutional environment, which
bluntly put was: How did we get to where
we are, and where are we going? Or, if you
will, what is the future of capitalism and
of the kind of market economy to which we
are accustomed and which is changing be-
fore our eyes? Lacking a dynamic, politico-
economic, and institutionally oriented
miodel, the neoclassical economist averts
his eyes-or possibly, and reluctantly, re-
fers the questioner to the still growing
Marxist literature. Has not the time come
for "orthodox" economists-both defenders
and critics of neoclassical theory-to re-
pair this glaring deficiency? Let us borrow
what seems appropriate from Marx and
his followers as well as from others, al-
though what Marx had to say fitted nine-
teenth century England much better than
it does late twentieth century Western
Europe or the United States. But at least
let us try to construct a model of the sort
I suggest that will have something to say
about the evolution and future of the kind
of economy and society in which we live.