on family behavior to cause business cycles.
However, declining population growth was a
major cause of the secular stagnation feared
by Alvin H. Hansen (1939) in his presidential
address to our Association almost fifty
years ago. Family behavior may play more
than a negligible role even in generating
ordinary business cycles. For example, an
increase in the labor supply of married women
or young people when household work
or school becomes less attractive can induce
cyclical responses in aggregate output and
other variables. Cycles started by shifts in
labor supply induce a negative relation between
wage rates and aggregate output over
business cycles. This would help explain why
cyclical fluctuations in real wages appear to
be less positively related to cyclical fluctuations
in aggregate output than is implied by
business cycles models that emphasize the
demand side.
Although family behavior presumably has
only a small part in the generation of
ordinary business cycles, it is likely to be
crucial to long cycles in economic activity.
Malthus claimed that family choices
cause long-term fluctuations in the economy
through the lagged effects first of marriages
on births and then of births on the size of
the labor force (see Maw Lin Lee and David
Loschky, 1987). Modern demographic analysis
generates long cycles in population growth
rates through the relation between aggregate
fertility and the age distribution, and perhaps
also between fertility and the size of a
cohort (see, for example, James C. Frauenthal
and Kenneth E. Swick, 1983, and Ronald
Lee, 1987a). In our modified Malthus-neoclassical
model, family choices cause long
cycles not only in population growth, but
also in capital, output, and other variables if
the elasticity of the degree of altruism per
child with respect to the number of children
declines as families get larger, a reasonable
assumption. Fertility and per capita income
then fluctuate in generation-long cycles whenever
the economy is disturbed away from the
steady state (for a proof, see Jess Benhabib
and Kazuo Nishimura, 1986).
In the 1920s, the Russian economist
Nicholas D. Kondratieff claimed that capitalist
economies exhibit long-term fluctuations
of about fifty years' duration in output
and prices (see Kondratieff, 1935). Simon
Kuznets (1958) later argued that long-term
fluctuations only last about twenty years. If
long cycles of the Kondratieff or Kuznets
type exist-we will need another 200 years
of data to determine whether they do exist
or are just a statistical figment of an overactive
imagination-they almost certainly will
depend on fertility and other family decisions
that biologically require a long time to
implement.
IV. Overlapping Generations
The intrinsic risks faced by the elderly,
sick, and unemployed are surely no greater
in rich countries like Germany and the
United States than in poor countries like
China and India, nor do these risks rise as a
country develops. Yet the first large-scale
Social Security program was introduced by
Germany a mere 100 years ago. China, India,
and numerous other countries still have
only modest programs that exclude many of
their old people. We take publicly financed
schools for granted, but they were unimportant
until the latter half of the nineteenth
century. Public and private programs that
protect against the consequences of illness
and unemployment are even newer and less
common than Social Security and public
schools.
Throughout history the risks faced by the
elderly, young, sick, and unemployed have
been met primarily by the family, not by
state transfers, private charity, or private
insurance. Children usually cared for elderly
or infirm parents, the unemployed looked to
their families for temporary support, and
parents have spent much time, money, and
energy to rear and train their children. Despite
the rapid growth of Social Security
payments in the past few decades, almost 20
percent of women aged 65 and over in the
United States still live with their children.
The altruism and love of parents, children,
spouses, and other relatives have helped protect
family members against the hazards of
childhood, old age, and other risks. When
altruism is insufficient-unfortunately, it
often is-what sociologists call social norms