tively to the wage-unit that the rate of
interest would fall to a level compatible
with full employment, we should, in effect,
have monetary management by the
Trade Unions, aimed at full employment,
instead of by the banking systems.
[p. 2671
The only novelty is that MREH replaces Keynes'
opening "if" with a "since."
If one accepts this little amendment, the case
against stabilization policies is complete. The
economy is inherently pretty stable-except
possibly for the effect of government messing
around. And to the extent that there is a small
residual instability, it is beyond the power of
human beings, let alone the government, to
alleviate it.
III. How Valid Is the Monetarist Case?
A. The Monetarist Model of Wage
Price Behavior
In setting out the counterattack it is convenient
to start with the monetarists' model of price and
wage behavior. Here one must distinguish between
the model as such and a specific implication
of that model, namely that the long-run
Phillips curve is vertical, or, in substance, that,
in the long run, money is neutral. That conclusion,
by now, does not meet serious objection
from nonmonetarists, at least as a first
approximation.
But the proposition that other things equal,
and given time enough, the economy will eventually
adjust to any indefinitely maintained stock
of money, or nth derivative thereof, can be derived
from a variety of models and, in any event,
is of very little practical relevance, as I will argue
below. What is unacceptable, because inconsistent
with both micro and macro evidence, is
the specific monetarist model set out above and
its implication that all unemployment is a voluntary,
fleeting response to transitory misperceptions.

One may usefully begin with a criticism of the
Macro Rational Expectations model and why
Keynes' "if" should not be replaced by
"since." At the logical level, Benjamin Friedman
has called attention to the omission from
MREH of an explicit learning model, and has
suggested that, as a result, it can only be interpreted
as a description not of short-run but of
long-run equilibrium in which no agent would
wish to recontract. But then the implications of
MREH are clearly far from startling, and their
policy relevance is almost nil. At the institutional
level, Stanley Fischer has shown that the
mere recognition of long-term contracts is sufficient
to generate wage rigidity and a substantial
scope for stabilization policies. But the most
glaring flaw of MREH is its inconsistency with
the evidence: if it were valid, deviations of unemployment
from the natural rate would be
small and transitory in which case The General
Theory would not have been written and
neither would this paper. Sargent (1976) has
attempted to remedy this fatal flaw by hypothesizing
that the persistent and large fluctuations
in unemployment reflect merely corresponding
swings in the natural rate itself. In other words,
what happened to the United States in the 1930's
was a severe attack of contagious laziness! I can
only say that, despite Sargent's ingenuity,
neither I nor, I expect, most others at least of
the nonmonetarists' persuasion are quite ready
yet to turn over the field of economic fluctuations
to the social psychologist!
Equally serious objections apply to Friedman'
s modeling of the commodity market as a
perfectly competitive one-so that the real wage
rate is continuously equated to the short-run
marginal product of labor-and to his treatment
of labor as a homogenous commodity traded in
an auction market, so that, at the going wage,
there never is any excess demand by firms or
excess supply by workers. The inadequacies of
this model as a useful formalization of present
day Western economies are so numerous that
only a few of the major ones can be mentioned
here.
Friedman's view of unemployment as a voluntary
reduction in labor supply could at best
provide an explanation of variations in labor
force-and then only under the questionable
assumption that the supply function has a sig-