DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
In sum, mandating benefits for the families of
workers is important, along with mandating
savings and mandating annuitization-the inclusion
of family benefits in Social Security
makes sense. There is good reason to think that
the current rules can be improved, but research
difficulties and political hurdles will need to be
overcome if we are to make improvements.
IV. Income Distribution, Insurance, and Labor
Supply38
In determining retirement benefits, Social Security
first averages the best 35 wage-indexed
annual earnings,39 then it uses a progressive
benefit formula to determine what real benefits
would be if first claimed at the age for full
benefits (commonly, if somewhat misleadingly,
called the normal retirement age),40 and then it
adjusts benefits for the age at which they start.
Moreover, between age 62 (the earliest age at
which retirement benefits can be claimed) and
the age for full benefits (which is in transition
from 65 to 67), benefits are only paid if earnings
are low enough, referred to as an earnings or
retirement test. Each of these steps in determining
benefits affects income distribution, insurance,
and labor supply. I will skip over
implications of using 35 years (as opposed to
more or fewer years or all of lifetime earnings
subject to tax)41 and of using a wage index to
weight the earnings in different years in determining
benefits (as opposed to using an
interest rate)42 and concentrate on the effects
38 For a discussion of the links among tax theory, incom-
plete market theory, and social security, see Diamond
(2002).
39 Earnings after age 60 enter in nominal terms, not in
indexed form. This should be changed to have labor incen-
tives not vary this way with inflation.
40 Such progressivity is missing in Europe, where in-
come distribution issues are addressed more fully in other
parts of retirement income provision.
41 Depending on the nature of the underlying stochastic
process of wage rates, both underweighting early years
(relative to the use of interest rates) and not counting some
low years may or may not help with insuring lifetime
earnings-this is not an area that has received much re-
search attention.
42 We can contrast the earnings incentives between ben-
efit formulas that accumulate earnings with a wage index
and those that accumulate with a (presumably higher on
average) interest rate. This is most readily done in a break-
even comparison, assuming the same level of resources for
of a progressive benefit formula and a retirement
test.43
Consider the stochastic process of earnings
opportunities. Individual workers face considerable
risks that are only partially correlated with
the economywide average earnings used in indexing.
Wages move differently by industry and
firm and region and some individuals have career
opportunities strongly affected by industry
and firm and region developments. We do not
have trading in the type of indexes Robert J.
Shiller (1993) has proposed in order to give
workers the ability to hedge these aspects of
their risks.44 Even if we managed to have trading
in such indices, it is beyond credibility that
most workers would take appropriate advantage
of these opportunities. When many workers can
not sort out the basics of portfolio diversification
in their 401(k)s, there is no reason to anticipate
successful execution of far more
complex financial strategies. By having replacement
rates that are higher for lower levels of
lifetime earnings, a social security system that
a cohort in each case. Using a wage index gives less weight
to the earlier years and more weight to the later years than
does use of an interest rate. Thus, use of a wage index would
be implicit taxation on younger workers and implicit subsidization
of older workers and would be a distortion in a
first-best world. However, the annual income tax is progres-
sive, so that an upward-sloping age-real earnings profile
implies that on average older workers have higher marginal
income tax rates than younger workers. Thus, the sum of the
marginal income tax plus the implicit Social Security tax is
smoother across ages with a wage index than with weight-
ing by interest rate. Also, preferences are not intertempo-
rally additive. The standard of living to which retirees have
become accustomed is more affected by earnings later in
life than earlier in life. While the effect of introducing a
standard-of-living effect into annual utility has been ex-
plored in simulations of the value of annuities (Davidoff et
al., 2003), no similar analysis has been done for the weight-
ing given earnings in different years.
43 I do not discuss the issues behind the choice of 62 as
the earliest age of eligibility for retirement benefits (EEA).
Increasing the EEA helps those who would otherwise retire
too early for their own good and hurts those who are right
in their early retirement decision and are hurt by the illi-
quidity from benefit nonavailability until the EEA. Measur-
ing the size of the two groups would be very hard and only
a little has been done in identifying people who are affected.
Increasing the EEA would have little effect on long-run
Social Security financing as explained below. Similarly, it
would be hard to design a good method for automatically
indexing the EEA.
44Robert C. Merton (1983) has examined the role of
Social Security in sharing aggregate earnings risks more
widely.
VOL. 94 NO. I
11