When the word of my prospective elevation
to this exalted position first circulated at
MIT at the end of March 1983, I happened
to encounter Peter Temin in the library. He
offered congratulations, and added: "In your
presidential address, skip the methodology.
Tell them a story." This is the technique that
he and Paul David used to great effect in
the session on economic history at Dallas a
year ago. I choose, however, to follow the
lead of another economic historian, Donald
McCloskey, who maintains that economics
should be a conversation (1983).
In a recent paper, unpublished I believe,
George Stigler discussed " the imperialism of
economics," which, he claims, is invading
and colonizing political science-through
public choice theory and the economic theory
of democracy-law, and perhaps especially
sociology, where our soon-to-be president-
elect, Gary Becker (1981), has extended
the reach of economics into questions of the
family, marriage, procreation, crime, and
other subjects usually dealt with by the sociologist.
"Imperialism" suggests super- and
subordination, with economics on top, and
raises the question whether as a profession
we are not flirting with vainglory.
My interest has long been in trade, and I
observe that economics imports from, as well
as exports to, its sister social sciences. In
public choice, we can perhaps explain after
the event whose interest was served by a
particular decision, but we need political science
to be able to forecast which interest is
likely to be served, whether that of the executive,
the legislature, the bureaucracy, some
pressure group-and which pressure group
or, in the odd instance, the voters. Individuals
act in their own interest, let us grant,
but a more general motive of emulation may
be drawn from sociology as Adam Smith was
aware in the Wealth of Nations (1776, p.
717), as well as in The Theory of Moral
Sentiments (1759 (1808), I, p. 113). I want
today to borrow one or two ideas from political
philosophy, and to conduct a conversation
with a new, impressive, and growing
breed of political scientists working on international
economic questions. The discussion
falls into two loosely connected halves- the
first dealing with what economists can, perhaps
should, and to some extent do, import
from political philosophy and sociology; the
second dealing more especially with international
public goods.
That sharp and sometimes angry theorist,
Frank Graham (1948), thought it a mistake
to think of trade between nations. Trade
took place between firms, he insisted. The
fact that they were in different states was
irrelevant so long as economic policy was
appropriately minimal, consisting perhaps of
free trade, annually balanced budgets, and
the gold standard. But states may differentiate
between firms, through such measures as
tariffs, embargos, monetary, fiscal, and exchange
rate policy which affect all firms
within a given space, and this adds a political
dimension (see my 1978 study). The essence
may go deeper. In an early graduate quiz,
I asked for the difference between domestic
and international trade, expecting a Ricardian
answer on factor mobility. One paper,
however, held that domestic trade was
among " us," whereas international trade was
between "us" and "them." The student who