This new degree of control has enabled Homo
sapiens to increase its average body size by
over 50 percent, to increase its average longevity
by more than 100 percent, and to improve
greatly the robustness and capacity of
vital organ systems.'
Figure 1 helps to point out how dramatic the
change in the control of environment after
1700 has been, and it highlights the astounding
acceleration of technological change over the
past two centuries. The advances in the technology
of food production after the Second
Agricultural. Revolution (which began about
1.700 A.D.) were far more dramatic than those
associated with the First Agricultural Revolution
since they permitted population to increase
at so high a rate that the line of
population appears to explode, rising almnost
vertically. The new technological breakthroughs
in manufacturing, transportation,
trade, communication, energy production,
leisure-time services, and medical services
were in many respects even. more striking than
those in agriculture. Figure 1. emphasizes that
prior to 1600, centuries elapsed between major
technological advances and the process of diffusion
was even more extended, continuing
over several millennia. Studies of the origin
and diffusion of the plow, for example, show
how little improvement there was in its design
between its original development in the Mesopotamian
valley around 4000 B.C. and its
diffusion across the Mediterranean Sea and
northward in Europe down to the beginning of
the second millennium (Bishop, 1936; E.
Cecil Curwen, 1953).
To my mind nothing better illustrates this
amazing acceleration in technological change
than the realization in the twentieth century of
humankind's ancient desire to fly. The first
successful motor-driven flight took place in
1903, but the fragile aircraft of Wilbur and
Orville Wright traveled only a few hundred
feet. Just 66 years later, an astronaut was
standing on the moon, talking to another astronaut
on earth, and hundreds of millions of

people around the world overheard and
watched that conversation.
Worldwide, the most important aspect of
technophysio evolution is the continuing conquest
of chronic malnutrition, which was virtually
universal three centuries ago.2 Table 1
shows that in rich countries today some 1,800
to 2,000 or more kilocalories (kcal) of energy
are available for work daily per equivalent
adult male, aged 20-39.3 At the beginning of
the eighteenth century, however, France produced
less than one-fifth of the current U.S.
amount of energy available for work. And England
was not much better off. Only the United
States provided potential energy for work
equal to or greater than late-twentieth-century
levels during the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, although some of that energy