less so than corporations with control over
our economic decisions.2 Intellectuals with
whom we identify are hardly intrusive at all.
Most of us grant that relatives must be permitted
to come together. On the other hand,
free migration of labor in general poses a
threat to the national identity. The Swiss cut
off immigration, despite the appeals of business
for more labor, when immigrants constituted
one-third of the labor force. In
Germany, separate localities felt threatened
and stopped inward migration when immigrants
reached 12 percent of the resident
population. Feelings differed, of course, depending
upon the origin of the migrants and
their appearance, language, and religion.
One early venture of international economics
into this line of investigation was
Robert Mundell's "optimum currency area"
(1961), initiating a discussion of how large
the area for a single currency should be, that
can readily be extended to economics in
general and to other social sciences. Mundell
defined an optimum currency area as one
where labor moved freely within the area,
but not between it and other areas, taking us
back to the Ricardian criterion distinguishing
domestic from foreign trade: factor mobility
within but not between countries. In
neither case is the discontinuity in mobility
explained. Perhaps something is owed to low
transport costs, but additionally, factor mobility
requires a group with such strong social
cohesion that those moving are willing to
shift, and those at the receiving end are
content to receive them.
Ronald McKinnon (1963) offered a different
criterion: an optimum currency area was
one that traded intensively at home, but only
to a limited extent abroad. This implied that
tastes within a country are homogeneous for
traded goods (as well as for public goods),
and that regionally specialized production
had grown up to serve those tastes. The
Mundell and McKinnon criteria do not necessarily
converge: on Mundell's standard,
Canada is too big to be an optimum currency
area, because of limited movement between
Quebec and the English-speaking parts
of Canada, and the comparative isolation of
the Maritimes and Vancouver. On McKinnon'
s criterion, however, it was too small
because so much of its trade is with the
United States.
If one broadens the issue from the optimum
currency area to economics more generally
and to the other social sciences,
anomalies arise from the divergence between
the optimum economic area, which on
efficiency grounds I take to be the world, and
the optimum social unit, one that gives the
individual a sense of belonging and counting
-which is much smaller. In shifting to the
optimum political unit, at least two problems
arise, one related to the nature of the ties, the
other to the ambitions of its members. To
take the second point first, for a nation bent
on glory-led by a Bismarck or a de Gaulle
-bigger is better; whereas if one is merely
trying to get along without trouble, like, say,
Denmark, small is beautiful enough.
On the first issue, political ties vary widely.
There are leagues, alliances, commonwealths,
confederations, federations, provinces, states,
principalities, kingdoms. Some lesser units
are "united" in varying degrees, as in the
United Provinces of the Netherlands, the
United States of America, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain, and Northern Ireland.
The North in the American Civil War was a
union, as the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics
asserts it is. The small amount of
literature I have explored in examining the
differences among these forms is not very
conclusive, but perhaps the main distinction
is between a single state that is centralized,
and federations that are loosely joined, with
greater powers at the local level. Designations
are not always congruent with reality:
the Federal German Republic is highly unified,
despite the efforts of the occupation
powers after World War II to spread political