indifferent between the deterministic stream
and the compensated, risky stream. That is, A is
chosen to solve
(3) E: E t ((1 + A)ct) l-
Many questions have been raised about this
estimate, and subsequent research on this issue
has pursued many of them, taking the discus-
sion deep into new scientific territory. In the
next four sections, I will review some of the
main findings.
III. Removeable Variance: Two Estimates
(Aegt)l -Y
t=0
where ct is given by (1). Canceling, taking logs,
and collecting terms gives
(4) A ^ YI '2.
A 2 y r
This compensation parameter A-the welfare
gain from eliminating consumption risk-
depends, naturally enough, on the amount of
risk that is present, cr2, and the aversion people
have for this risk, y.
We can get an initial idea of the value to the
economy as a whole of removing aggregate risk
by viewing this agent as representative of U.S.
consumers in general. In this case, to estimate A
we need estimates of the variance o02 of the log
of consumption about its trend, and of the co-
efficient y of risk aversion. Using annual U.S.
data for the period 1947-2001, the standard
deviation of the log of real, per capita consump-
tion about a linear trend is 0.032.5 Estimates of the
parameter y in use in macroeconomics and pub-
lic finance applications today range from 1 (log
utility) to 4. Using log utility, for example, the
formula (4) yields the welfare cost estimate
(5) A = (0.032)2 = 0.0005,
about one-twentieth of 1 percent of consumption.
Compared to the examples of welfare gains
from fiscal and monetary policy changes that I
cited above, this estimate seems trivially small:
more than an order of magnitude smaller than
the gain from ending a 10-percent inflation!

Even if we do not know exactly how much
consumption risk would be removed by an op-
timal monetary and fiscal policy, it is clear that
it would fall far short of the removal of all
variability. The major empirical finding in mac-
roeconomics over the past 25 years was the
demonstration by Finn E. Kydland and Prescott
(1982), replicated and refined by Gary D.
Hansen (1985) and by many others since then,
that technology shocks measured by the method
of Robert M. Solow (1957) can induce a rea-
sonably parameterized stochastic growth model
to exhibit nearly the same variability in produc-
tion and consumption as we see in postwar U.S.
time series. In the basic growth model, equilib-
rium and optimal growth are equivalent, so that
if technology shocks are all there is to postwar
business cycles, resources are already being al-
located efficiently and a variance-reducing
monetary-fiscal policy would be welfare reduc-
ing. Even if the equilibrium is inefficient, due to
distorting taxes, missing markets or the like, in
the face of unavoidable technology and prefer-
ence shocks an optimal monetary and fiscal
policy will surely be associated with a positive
level of consumption variance. We need to es-
timate the size of that part and remove it from
the estimate of ao used in (4).
Matthew D. Shapiro and Mark W. Watson's
(1988) study is one of several relatively atheo-
retical attempts to break down the variance of
production and other variables into a fraction
due to what these authors call "demand" shocks
(and which I will call "nominal" shocks) and
fractions due to technology and other sources.
Their study represents quarterly U.S. time series
over the period 1951-1985 as distributed lags of
serially independent shocks. The observables
include first differences of a measure of hours
worked, a log real GDP measure, and the cor-
responding implicit price deflator. To these
three rates of change are added an ex post real
interest rate (the three-month Treasury bill rate