F. M. Scherer, 1983, 1986; Robert Evenson,
1984; Baily and A. K. Chakrabarti, 1988).
This is a rather pessimistic view of our
current situation, and I would like to argue
that the observed facts do not really support
it. But that will not be easy, both because
some of the "facts" are contradictory and
because our measurement and observational
tools are becoming increasingly inadequate
in the context of our changing economy.
Nevertheless, I will review some of the
evidence for such views and argue with their
interpretation. There are several possibilities
here: (i) this view is true and that is sad;
(ii) it is not true and recovery is around the
corner if not already underway; (iii) it may
be true, but whatever is or is not happening
has little to do with diminishing returns to
science or industrial R&D. Or, (iv) it may
be that we just do not know. As is the case
with global warming, we may not have an
adequate understanding of the mechanisms
producing growth or adequate data to adjudicate
whether there has or has not been an
underlying trend shift. If that is true, as is
most likely, the question arises as to why we
don't know more after years of research
done by so many good people. What is it
about our data and data acquisition structure,
and possibly also our intellectual
framework, that prevents us from making
more progress on this topic?
In discussing this range of topics, I will
concentrate primarily on the R&D component
of this story-not because it can explain
much of the productivity slowdown (it
cannot), and not just because this is where I
have done most of my recent work, but
because it illustrates rather well the major
point I want to make here tonight: that our
understanding of what is happening in our
economy (and in the world economy) is constrained
by the extent and quality of the
available data. I will also allude briefly to
similar issues which arise in interpreting the
productivity contribution of computers in
the economy. Parallel tales about data constraining
our understanding could also be
told about other potential productivityslowdown
villains: energy-price shocks, insufficient
investment in'physical capital, and
possible declines in human-capital investments.
Having reached the verdict of "not
proven," largely on account of insufficient
evidence, I shall make a number of more
general remarks on the state of our data
and the possible reasons for it. The major
message that I will be trying to convey is
that we often misinterpret the available data
because of inadequate attention to how they
are produced and that the same inattention
by us to the sources of our data helps explain
why progress is so slow. It is not just
the measurement of productivity that is affected.
Other fields of empirical economics
are also struggling against the limitations
imposed by the available data. Great advances
have been made in theory and in
econometric techniques, but these will be
wasted unless they are applied to the right
data.
I. The "Facts"
There are three sets of "facts" to look at:
what has happened to productivity, what
has happened to investment in R&D and
science, and what has happened to the relationship
between them. Sometime in the
late 1960's measured productivity growth in
the United States started to slow down.
After a mild recovery in the early 1970's,
the world economy was hit by two successive
oil-price shocks which dropped economic
growth rates in most of the developed
economies to levels significantly below
those experienced in the 1960's and early
1970's. While the effects of the oil-price
shocks wore off and real energy prices declined
to close to their earlier levels, productivity
growth rates did not recover much.
At this point, and also somewhat earlier,
many observers started wondering whether
something more fundamental than just an
energy-price-shock-induced business cycle
was afoot. Standing in the early 1980's and
looking back at the recent past, one would
have observed a decline in total patents
granted in the United States beginning in
the early 1970's and a decline in the share
of GNP being devoted to industrial R&D
starting in the mid-1960's, the timing looking
suspiciously appropriate for declining
productivity growth rates 5-10 years later.