to an economic theorist who has
developed proficiency in his research style.
The precocious development of that proficiency
is a comparative advantage that a
mathematical approach bestows on him.
The spread of mathematized economic
theory was helped even by its esoteric character.
Since its messages cannot be deciphered
by economists who do not have the
proper key, their evaluation is entrusted to
those who have access to the code. But
acceptance of their technical expertise also
implies acceptance of their values. Our profession
may take pride in its exceptional
intellectual diversity, one of whose clearest
symbols is an Ely lecture given by an economic
historian at a session chaired by a
mathematical economist. Yet that diversity
is strained by the increasing impenetrability
to the overwhelming majority of our Association
of the work done by its most mathematical
members.
IV
The bond that ties economists together in
their study of a common subject has not
been tested only by differences in methodologies.
It has also been tried by differences
in ideologies. In their endeavors to make
their field into a science, economists must
renounce a favorite mode of thinkingwishful
thinking; they must be impartial
spectators of a play in which they are the
actors. While they attempt to keep that
inhuman stance, they are pressed to give
immediate answers to societal questions of
immense complexity and thereby to abandon
the exacting slowness of the step-by-step
scientific approach. Divisions according to
methodologies and ideologies, criticism from
outside and from inside, and intellectual
fashions that sweep our discipline make each
one of its steady developments remarkable.
The mathematization of economic theory
was one of them for a century and a half.
During the past five decades it became one
of the prime movers in the transformation
of our field. The extent of that mathematization
has given rise to discordant assessments
of its effects and to attempts to
change its heading. The quality of assessments
of the phase that economic theory
underwent and the effectiveness of attempts
to alter the course of its evolution will gain
from a detailed analysis of the processes
that led to its present state.