DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
informed and well-educated. The presence of
mandatory annuitization does not prevent bequests,
although it raises the cost and requires
action to do so. Those surviving to the start of
their benefits and with sufficient life expectancy
can use part of their monthly Social Security
benefits to finance a long-term life insurance
contract, thereby providing a bequest with an
explicit choice of the relationship between the
real size of the bequest and the date of death.
This action contrasts with simply leaving unspent
funds to one's heirs, a strategy that leaves
an amount dependent on the history of consumption
relative to the income earned on  assets.20
In other words, the government's choice between
providing retirement benefits as annuities
or as lump sums can be considered as a choice
of a default, one which most individuals could
reverse-by purchasing life insurance if provided
an annuity or purchasing an annuity if
offered a lump sum (B. Douglas Berheim,
1991). Reversing the government choice,
though, takes time, thought, and effort and it has
a cost. That is, the government provides annuitization
at a far lower cost than does the private
market. The absence of selling costs (other than
equivalent information provision) and economies
of scale contribute to this advantage. Administrative
costs of Social Security are less
than 1 percent of annual expenditures, and a
great deal of that is due to the disability program,
which is naturally more expensive to run.
In contrast, privately provided insurance has
higher costs-life insurance company accounting
generally recognizes over 10 percent of
premia used for administrative costs and profit.
The private market is more expensive and does
not do a better job of delivering annuity products
that people need.21 This is one reason to
20 The timing of the purchase of both life insurance and  annuities is important for obtaining insurance. Waiting to  insure passes up insurance opportunities. The effects of  waiting depend on the extent of risk classification in the  pricing of insurance.  21 With any commodity, selling costs could be avoided  by mandating payment for government provision. What  distinguishes retirement annuities from most other products  are the similarity of needs of different workers (compared  with the diversity of tastes for different commodities) and  the reasons why a retirement income mandate is needed.  These reasons suggest that public provision is not blocking  an otherwise creative dynamic product development. The  have government provision rather than a mandate
to purchase an annuity in the private market.
22 As with many other settings, we expect
individuals to undo little of what is provided.23
So it makes sense to offer what we think people
might sensibly want. Moreover, the wider functioning
of the life insurance market than the
annuities market suggests a further advantage to
using substantial annuitization as the default.
A mandatory retirement income program requires
a choice of the form of benefit and it is
hard to think of a basis for choosing the form
which is other than what makes sense for the
bulk of the population. It seems to me that this
is an annuity in some form.24
A. Lifetime Income Distribution
Mandated annuitization affects lifetime
income distribution.25 Suppose one were
nature of the cash-in, cash-out annuity product also suggests  that we are not missing cost improvements that would  otherwise come. The small size of replacement provided by  Social Security leaves lots of room for such private devel-  opments if they did represent a significant opportunity.  22 With mandated private purchase, if allowed, we would  get risk classification and separate pricing, as has happened  in the United Kingdom. Separate risk classification has  advantages and disadvantages, and it is unclear whether it
would be better.
23 While many of the elderly have life insurance policies,  these appear to arise mostly from coverage for funeral  arrangements, small old policies that were not terminated,  and tax avoidance among the wealthy, rather than from a  conscious attempt to undo annuitization.  24 Mandatory annuitization in a social security program  raises the interesting question of how monthly benefit  should vary over time-with prices, wages, and possibly
other variables such as rates of return. Relevant for this
issue are the age structure of optimized expenditures, the  relative importance of both real and relative consumption,  and the allocation of risk bearing between the elderly and  the rest of the population. Currently, benefits in force are  increased for inflation as measured by the CPI. While this is  a reasonable solution, I suspect it would be better, on a  revenue neutral basis, to have lower initial benefits that then
grew faster (for example as a weighted average of prices  and wages). This would help the longer-lived more than the  shorter-lived, but the effect on expected lifetime income  distribution could be partially adjusted by changing the benefit  formula. But this issue has not received detailed analysis.  25 A full analysis of the income distribution effects of  Social Security should consider the disability program along  with the retirement income program since there is a negative  correlation between life expectancy and the likelihood of  collecting disability benefits and dying young enough to  leave children who collect young survivor benefits.
7
VOL. 94 NO. I