is a significant difference between the groups in
the extent of support for the actuariai model in-
dex. The economic theorists have a value of
0.61, compared with 0.46 for the health econo-
mists and 0.44 for the practicing physicians. The
theorists are as supportive of national health in-
surance as are the other groups, but if insurance
is to be provided through the private market, the
theorists are more inclined than the other two
groups to have premiums reflect expected loss.
One reasonable interpretation of this result is that
the theorists give more weight to the efficiency
aspects of the actuarial model, whereas the
health economists and the practicing physicians
give more weight to the distributional aspects.
Is there a close relationship between the re-
spondents' scores on the indexes and their
responses to the positive questions? The corre-
lation coefficients presented in Table 4 show
that the answer is overwhelmingly in the nega-
tive. For the national health insurance index
there is only one positive question (10) for one
group (the health economists) that reaches sta-
tistical significance with p < 0.05. For the ac-
tuarial model index, only questions 9 and 10
show a significant relationship for the health
economists, and questions 10 and 12 for all
groups taken together. Whatever it is that is de-
termining the respondents' positions with regard
to national health insurance or the actuarial ap-
proach, it is not their views on the seven positive
questions.
Correlations between the indexes and the six
policy-value questions not utilized in their
construction also are typically low, with one
striking exception. Respondents agreeing with
question 5, which calls for national standard-
ized health insurance benefit packages, also
support national health insurance and just as
clearly reject the actuarial approach for private
insurance underwriting. The actuarial model
index is also negatively correlated with agree-
ment with question 1.
The weak relationship between the positive
questions and the two indexes is also revealed
in Table 5, which presents the results of re-
gressing the indexes on the positive ques-
tions.38 In the national health insurance