with few exceptions, is that wage rates are
specified in the contract, and the employer
chooses the amount of employment. This is
not exactly simple monopoly, because the
union cannot set the wage schedule unilaterally.
To the extent that it can, another
source of wage stickiness can be identified.
Under a reasonable assumption about what
the union maximizes, it turns out that the
only aspect of the demand for labor that has
any effect on the monopoly wage is its elasticity.
So if the demand curve for labor
shifts down nearly isoelastically in a recession,
the contractual wage will change little
or not at all, and the full effect of the fall in
demand will bear on employment. The
amount of unemployment compensation
available plays a role here too. (There is
much more to be said along these lines,
and Ian McDonald of the University of
Melbourne and I hope to say it on another
occasion.)
(6) As a last example, I recall Pigou's
observation that wage changes may be
seen by the parties as hard to reverse without
a struggle whose duration and outcome
cannot be foreseen. The resulting uncertainty
causes employers to drag their feet
when demand increases temporarily and
workers to reciprocate when demand falls.
The result is wage stickiness in the face of
fluctuating employment.
Only what Veblen called trained incapacity
could prevent anyone from seeing that
some or all of these mechanisms do indeed
capture real aspects of the modern capitalist
economy. Assessing their combined significance
quantitatively would be a very difficult
task, and I do not pretend to be able
to do that. We are all interpreting this ink
blot together. Obviously I would not be
giving this particular talk if I did not think
that wage stickiness is a first-order factor in
a reasonable theory of unemployment.
To make my position plausible, I want to
try to summarize the sort of general characteristics
that the labor market should have
if the particular mechanisms that I have
enumerated are to be important. By the
way, I have no reason to believe that my list
is anything like exhaustive; you may think
of others. Simply to narrow the field, I have
deliberately left out of account factors relating
specifically to age, sex, race, and other
characteristics that normally form the basis
for discussions of structural unemployment
as distinct from cyclical unemployment.
The sort of labor market I have in mind is
segmented. It often makes sense to think of
an employer or definable group of employers
as facing its own labor pool. Some
members of the labor pool may be unemployed,
but still belong to it. Although
transportation, information, and transaction
costs are possible sources of segmentation,
they need not be among the most important.
The buildup of firm-specific or industryspecific
human capital may be more fundamental,
and equally a kind of mutual knowing-
what-to-expect that gives both parties in
the labor market a stake, a rent, in the
durability of the relationship. This point is
close to the distinction between auction
markets and customer markets made by
Arthur Okun in a different context. The
labor market, at least the "primary" labor
market, is a customer market; this may be
one of the important facts that differentiates
the primary from the secondary labor
market.
A second general characteristic is the
availability of some nontrivial source of
nonemployment income. The obvious one is
unemployment compensation, but I imagine
that fringe activity ranging from hustling to
home maintenance can function in much
the same way. I suppose in some societies
the possibility of returning temporarily to
farming is now as important as it once was
here. The presence of a second earner in the
family can make an obvious difference. One
consequence is that it becomes easier to
maintain a labor pool in the presence of
fluctuating employment. In addition, as I
mentioned a few moments ago, several of
the specific sticky-wage mechanisms in my
catalog depend for their operation on this
characteristic.
Third, the stability of the labor pool
makes it possible for social conventions to
assume some importance. There is a difference
between a long-term relationship
and a one-night stand, and acceptable behavior
in one context may be unacceptable
in the other. Presumably most conventions
are adaptive, not arbitrary, but adaptiveness