advocates have, in fact, proposed a tax on
labor income on grounds of simplicity and
administrative feasibility.3" Most people
would be appalled by a proposal to substitute
a wage tax for income tax, yet that is
essentially what expenditure tax proponents
are advocating.
Many economists are attracted to the expenditure
tax because it would not tax income
from capital and would thus eliminate
all the income tax problems arising from the
use of the realization principle for calculating
capital gains and losses and from the
accounting conventions for inventories, depreciation,
and depletion used in arriving at
net business profits. There would also be no
need to adjust the tax base for inflation, as
consumption would be measured appropriately
in current dollars. These are serious
problems for income taxation and I shall
deal with them later, but it would be unfortunate
to abandon the income tax for administrative
and compliance reasons alone.
The transition from the income tax to an
expenditure tax would be troublesome. The
retired elderly would draw down assets, some
of which had previously been taxed under
the income tax, to finance current consumption
that would be taxed yet again. To avoid
this double tax, some method would need to
be devised to identify consumption from
previously taxed accumulations. Grandfathering
all assets at the time an expenditure
tax is initiated would leave a big loophole
for people with large amounts of
untaxed accrued capital gains. But I have
not seen any practical method of making the
necessary distinctions in order to prevent
wholesale tax avoidance and to achieve
equity.32
Under an expenditure tax, taxpayers who
save could accumulate large amounts of
wealth over a lifetime. Many, but by no
means all, expenditure tax advocates support
wealth or estate and gift taxes to prevent
excessive concentrations of wealth. But the
history of transfer taxation in this country
and abroad provides little assurance that
effective death and gift taxes would be levied
to supplement an expenditure tax.
Proponents of expenditure taxation often
compare the merits of a comprehensive expenditure
tax with the income tax as it has
developed. It is hard to believe that an expenditure
tax would be enacted without numerous
exemptions and exclusions. In fact,
most of the eroding features of the income
tax (for example, preferences for housing,
fringe benefits, child care, state-local borrowing,
etc.) might be carried over to the expenditure
tax. Thus, an expenditure tax is no
less immune to erosion than the income tax
and, in such circumstances, it loses much of
its attractiveness.
I conclude that income is a better indicator
of ability to pay than consumption and
that the major upheaval of substituting an
expenditure tax for an income tax cannot be
justified on theoretical or practical grounds.
How Much Progression? The effective degree
of progression of the income tax depends
on the comprehensiveness of the tax
base as well as on the tax rates. We have
learned from experience that high, graduated
tax rates do not assure progressivity of the
income tax. For most of the period since the
end of World War II, the top U.S. income
tax rates were 70 percent or higher. Yet little
equalization resulted because of the erosion
of the base of the individual and corporate
income taxes and because of increases in the
payroll tax for Social Security.33 According
the second, then
Si = WI - Ci
C2 = w2 + (1 + r )s
cl(l + r) +c2 =(1 + r)(wi-sl) + w2+ (1 + r)sl
cl(1+ r)+c2= (1+ r)w + w2.
31See Hall and Rabushka (1985), Bradford (1986),
ch. 14, and McLure, Mutti, Thuroni, and Zodrow (1988),
ch. 9.
32For a discussion of these problems and possible
solutions, see Aaron and Galper (1985), pp. 78-79 and
99-103, and U.S. Department of the Treasury (1977),
chaps. 4 and 6.
33The combined employer-employee payroll tax rose
from 6 percent in 1960 to 12.26 percent in 1985 and