Social Securityt
By PETER DIAMOND*
I frequently find economists who express a
view of the system that is very far from mine.
For example, many young economists and economics
students say that they expect to get no
benefits at all from Social Security. This expectation
does not seem sensible to me. If there is
no legislation changing Social Security, trust
fund assets and payroll tax revenue (and revenue
from the taxation of benefits) are projected
to be sufficient to pay all the benefits scheduled
under current law until 2042 (Board of Trustees
of Social Security and Medicare, 2003). After
the trust fund assets are exhausted the payroll
tax revenue would continue to be available to
pay benefits, with the flow of revenues at that
time sufficient to pay roughly three-quarters of
the benefits scheduled in current law. The estimate
for the end of the 75-year projection period
shows enough revenue to pay roughly
two-thirds of scheduled benefits. With initial
benefits indexed to earnings, average real benefits
would be higher than today, although replacement
rates would only be roughly 60
percent of current levels for the medium
worker. This projection is a far cry from no
benefits.
Moreover, I anticipate that Congress will act
before the trust fund is exhausted, both lowering
t Presidential Address delivered at the one hundred fifteenth
meeting of the American Economic Association,  January 4, 2004, San Diego, CA.
* Department of Economics, E52-344, Massachusetts In-  stitute of Technology, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA  02142 (e-mail: pdiamond@MIT.EDU). I am grateful to  Robert Hall for suggesting a framework for approaching  Social Security for this address and to him and Henry  Aaron, Alan Auerbach, Abhijit Banerjee, Nicholas Barr,  Olivier Blanchard, Jeffrey Brown, Courtney Coile, Dora  Costa, Thomas Davidoff, Esther Duflo, Jonathan Gruber,  David Laibson, Jeffrey Liebman, Assar Lindbeck, Alicia  Munnell, Peter Orszag, James Poterba, Virginia Reno, Ber-  nard Saffran, Eytan Sheshinski, Robert Solow, and Peter  Temin for valuable comments on previous drafts, and to the  National Science Foundation for financial support under  Grant No. SES0239380. The address draws heavily on the  thinking behind and the content of my book with Peter R.  Orszag (2004). I have greatly enjoyed and profited from the
collaboration on this and earlier work.
benefits relative to those scheduled under current
law and providing additional revenues to
finance higher benefits than are payable after
2042. After all, the financial problem of Social
Security is not so very large (unlike the larger
and more complex set of financial problems of
Medicare and Medicaid).1 An increase in tax
revenue of just over 15 percent of currently
projected payroll tax revenues would handle the
projected cash flow problem for 75 years on a
present value basis. On an annual cash flow
basis, the share of GDP needed to provide all of
the benefits scheduled in current law would
increase from 4.4 percent of GDP today to 7.0
percent in 2077.2 Like almost everyone else, I
do not favor addressing the projected deficit by
simply adding more revenues with no other
changes. Nor do I picture that solution as having
any political prospects. But solving the problem
with a mix of benefit reductions and revenue
increases does not require large changes, nor
does it require a fundamental restructuring of
the program.
It is not just in the perception of the projections
and the forecast of politics that I find
myself in disagreement with opinions that I
often hear. More generally, I think the system
works better than many economists think. I
hope to convince you that the approach inherent
in the current U.S. system broadly makes good
sense. In particular, I will argue that it makes
sense to mandate taxes to finance a reasonable
replacement of earnings after retirement; that it
makes sense to mandate that retirement benefits
be paid as an annuity; that it makes sense to
mandate protection for family members, both
young children and surviving spouses; that it
I also note that the financial problems of Social Secu-  rity are smaller than the problems in many other countries,  a comparison that seems to surprise some people.  2 To put this change in historic context: Spending on  public education when the baby boomers were children  increased by 2.8 percent of GDP over 25 years; defense  spending during the Cold War increased by 2.5 percent of  GDP in 2 years; defense spending in the 1980's increased  by 1.5 percent of GDP in 6 years; defense spending in the  1990's decreased by 2.6 percent of GDP in 10 years.
1