When I began to study economics, in the
1930's, macroeconomics certainly existed, in
the works of such luminaries as Wicksell,
Fisher, Robertson, and the early Keynes. But
it was surely not recognized as a branch of
economics in which one might specialize; nor
was it regarded as necessary for the education
of an economist. Thus, like almost everyone
else, I began professional life as a
price-theorist. The principal alternative was
to become an institutionalist; and that didn't
particularly attract me. Only later, and somewhat
by accident, did I become a macroeconomist.


Ever since the emergence of macroeconomics
as a distinct and (almost) respectable
branch of analysis, there has been a conscious
tension between macroeconomics and
microeconomics; much of this tension relates
to the roles and the behavior of prices and of
the price level. Surely, it cannot be said that
macroeconomics ignores prices and price
changes, as is sometimes suggested. Milton
Friedman and his monetarist associates and
followers-who are macroeconomists of the
first water-surely do not ignore prices. And
the patron saint of my kind of macroeconomics,
John Maynard Keynes, also certainly
paid a great deal of attention to both relative
prices and the price level. My concern with
prices here, however, is not with inflation,
but rather with the price-theoretical foundations
of macroeconomics. Essentially, I will
be discussing some of the roles that microeconomists
and macroeconomists see for
prices, and particularly for price changes.
Price theory has moved a long way since I
deserted it, and I no longer claim any expertise
in this area. But I have the impression
that many current problems both in microand
macroeconomics tend to be the same
problems-looked at from opposite sides of
the borderline between them. Thus I propose
to lead us on a stroll along some sectors of
that border, moving back and forth across it
from time to time, for there is no fence. And
I intend only a meander, not a mapping. The
spirit in which the journey is undertaken is
that this is really all one country, and strollers
should be welcome.

But it is not an imaginary country that I
propose we visit. We will see no Walrasian
auctioneers, although we will see many
markets that seem to work pretty well without
them. On the other hand, we will see very
few wage rates being frequently revised; and
many prices will look as though they were
being revised only to maintain fairly stable
markups over unit costs. In general, we will
observe that the population of this country is
neither very much brighter-nor much more
stupid-than you and I are, in our own
economic decisions.

Some aspects of the problems that I will
discuss are particularly important in an age
of inflation, and to the theory of inflation.
But I prefer to conduct most of my discussion
without explicit reference to changes in
the general price level. For almost all of the
matters that I will discuss primarily involve
relative prices; and it is simpler to deal with
them on the assumption of a constant price
level. That way, I do not need to keep repeating
"real price."

I start with the prices and inventories of
standardized commodities.
I. Commodity Prices and Inventories
Economists often find it useful to think of
the quantities of a commodity supplied to a
competitive market as consisting of a supply
from current production plus a possible
supply from inventory; and the market demand,