neoclassical theory is a theory of relative
prices. Monetary theories vaguely related
to it in spirit can be grafted on to it, but
none have succeeded in achieving a
genuine synthesis.
The two failures of the neoclassical explanatory
mechanism reflect on its foundations
in quite different ways. The existence
of unemployment is clearly a direct contradiction
to the notion of the smoothly
clearing market. One must of course be
aware that the official measure of unem-'
ployment is by no means a simple inequality
between supply and demand; it aggregates
a whole range of distinct markets,
it does not separate out voluntary and involuntary
unemployment according to the
tests of economic theory, and it does not
take account of unfilled jobs. I do not subscribe,
I hasten to say, to the sometimes
expressed view that all unemployment is
essentially voluntary, an unwillingness to
search or whatnot; indeed, the official
measure may underestimate the degree of
disequilibrium in the labor market, particularly
with regard both to underutilization
of advanced skills and discouraged job
seekers. With all these qualifications, it is
clear that statistical unemployment does
correspond to a disequilibrium as that
term is used in the basic neoclassical
model; there are two individuals, identical
in productive capacity and both willing
to work at a given wage, but one is working
at that wage and the other is not.
Differential levels of economic development,
on the other hand, point to a difficulty
with the other fundamental concept;
the conditions of optimization. If countries
differ in their production possibility sets,
then firms, occupying similar economic
positions, are facing different constraints
on their optimization. This does not contradict
the fundamental assumption of
optimizing behavior, but it does raise
severe questions about its interpretation.
The simplest hypothesis is to take the
technological conditions as data, possibly
varying over time due to exogenous changes
in scientific knowledge. But here we are
asserting that two contemporaries have
different access to productive knowledge.
Clearly, we are saying something about the
conditions of transmission of knowledge
across national boundaries, and of course
the same questions arise among firms or
workers within a single economy. The constraints
upon the firm's optimization begin
to seem more like variables to be explained
than like constants exogenously given.
Let me look now at the two basic concepts
from the inside, from the point of
view of our direct perceptions which motivate
the modelling. The two are far from
parallel. The optimization by individual
agents has a sense of concreteness about it,
for all the sophisticated mathematical
ability with which we theorists endow the
agents. They behave in ways whose logic
we understand. They seek to achieve goals
which are reasonable to postulate, and we
can specify constraints which clearly are
real. It can be and has been correctly objected
that our models are too simple; we
ignore other arguments in the utility function,
power, status, social approval, or
whatnot that also motivate individuals,
and we ignore some constraints, capacity
for calculation and social controls. But the
model is comprehensible, and the motives
and constraints we deal with are real and
important.
The market, on the other hand, is a
much more ethereal construct. Who exactly
is it that is achieving the balancing of
supply and demand? Where in fact is the
information on bids and offers needed for
equilibration actually collected and stored?
Right from the beginning of neoclassical
theory, the difficulty of explaining markets
in terms of individual self-seeking behavior
was perceived. Parenthetically, this
is one example of the superiority of neoclassical
analysis to its predecessors, de-