would otherwise be, beginning perhaps in
2010, are expected to cost in the hundreds
of billions in perpetuity.
There are a few numbers worth carrying
in mind. There are 700 billion tons of carbon
in the atmosphere. (Quotations are
sometimes in tons of carbon dioxide, rather
than carbon; the figure is then 32 times as
large, about 2,600 billion.) Annual emissions
are 6 billion tons. Close to half disappears
somewhere, and a little over half
remains in the atmosphere; so the concentration
is increasing by one-half percent per
year. It has increased 25 percent in the last
hundred years. (Concentration is reported
more often than tonnage; it is currently
about 350 parts per million.) And there are
upwards of ten trillion tons of carbon fuels
out there to be burned; if it were all burned
and half stayed in the atmosphere, the concentration
could double at least three times.
If the carbon in the atmosphere has already
increased by a quarter, has the average
temperature gone up as predicted? And
were the recent hot American summers that
stirred popular interest harbingers of greenhouse
summers to come?
To the first question, the answer is that
average global temperature-summer and
winter, both hemispheres, night and
day-has apparently risen by half a degree
in the last hundred years, but whether "as
predicted" depends on what qualifications
one reads into the predictions. The pattern
differed between the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres. The global average rose
during the first 40 years of this century, was
level for the next 40 years, and rose during
the past decade. This pattern demonstrates
that, whether or not we are witnessing the
greenhouse effect, there are other decadeslong
influences that can obscure any smooth
greenhouse trend. (The carbon concentration
is not at issue; it is well measured and
shows steady rise on a decade scale.) There
are known phenomena that could account
for the irregular temperature increase of
the past century, and whether we are witnessing
the "signal" probably depends on
whether one wants high confidence to reject
a null hypothesis or is about to bet money
on whether, another 25 years from now,
looking back, all doubt will have been removed.
I don't know what bets are being
placed by "greenhouse scientists," but they
are cautious in public on the question.
To the second question-do the hot
American summers of the past few years
announce the arrival of a greenhouse, confirming
predictions?-the answer is in two
parts: maybe it's the greenhouse; but it's not
what the greenhouse models predict. The
global average in the four hot years of the
past seven was only 0.2 degrees above the
level of the preceding 40 years; and sudden
hot American summers are not what the
models predict.
III
In anticipating the impact on human welfare
or natural systems, two kinds of uncertainty
are unlikely to be dispelled soon. One
is simply the question of what the changes
will be in each region or locality. Current
models are severely limited in their agreement
with each other, in their handling of
such topographical variables as mountain
ranges, and in the fineness of the grids they
superimpose on the globe. There is no great
confidence that the models will be greatly
improved within the next decade or two. A
chaos-like process may defeat efforts to improve
local predictions; and uncertainties in
gross phenomena, such as the behavior of
ocean currents under changed climatic conditions,
may not be much better understood
soon.
Even if we had confident estimates of
climate change for different regions of the
world, there would still be uncertainties
about the kind of world it is going to be 50,
75, or 100 years from now. Imagine it were
1900 and the climate changes associated
with a three-degree average temperature increase
were projected to 1992. On what
kind of world would we superimpose either
a vaguely described potential change in climate
or even a specific description of
changes in the weather in all the seasons of
the year, even for our own country. There
would have been no way to assess the impact
of changing climates on air travel, electronic
communication, the construction of