plot (the last couple of decades) we see a
more or less continuous decline with a small,
but possibly significant, turnaround in the
late 1980's. Similar trends can be seen also
in other countries, even in Japan (Evenson,
1991). But before one takes this as an indicator
of our recent problems, one should
glance also at the left side of this figure,
which goes back to the early 1920's. How
long has this been going on? This ratio
keeps falling, both through good times
(while productivity growth rates were rising)
and bad times. If this was not a cause for
worry earlier, why should one worry about it
now?9
III. Patents: A Shrinking Yardstick?
To decide whether we should be worried
by what is happening with the patent numbers
we need to know what they measure.
Since I have discussed this at some length
elsewhere (Griliches, 1990), I will make only
two points here. First, the interpretation of
Figure 4 need not be pessimistic. Its message
may not be what meets the eye. And,
second, the meaning of both the numerator
and the denominators of the ratios plotted
in Figure 4 may have changed significantly
over time.
If patents can be taken as indicators of
invention, and if the value of an invention is
proportional to the size of its market (or
economy), then the fact that their total
numbers remained roughly constant over
long time periods is consistent with nondeclining
growth rates of output and overall
productivity.10 If inventions are "produced"
by a combination of current R&D and the
existing state of knowledge (incorporating
the accumulated effects of science and
spillovers from the previous research activities
of others), and if R&D is invested approximately
"optimally," then under reasonable
assumptions, a rise (or fall) in the
underlying knowledge stock will affect them
both in parallel fashion and will leave their
ratio unchanged.1" There will be, therefore,
no evidence in this ratio on the underlying
state of the "stock of knowledge." Moreover,
it will be declining with growth in the
size of the market, since a rise in the value
of inventions will push R&D up until present
costs equal again the present value of
future (private) returns.
The rate of growth of domestic patents
was close to zero during the last three
decades. That by itself should not be worrisome.
If their average value had been growing
at the same rate as the economy as a
whole, there would be no reason for us to
worry about it. But there were long periods
when the actual numbers were worse than
that. During 1965-1985 the number of domestic
patent applications declined by - 0.6
percent per year while company-financed
R&D expenditures were growing by 4.8 percent
per year, in constant prices. But a
negative growth rate in the number of inventions
and a positive one in R&D are
inconsistent with an unchanging inventions
production function, unless the overall pool
of available knowledge is declining, or more
Actually quite a few people worried about it then
also: see Griliches (1990) for more detail and W.
Fellner (1970), who worried about the rising real cost
of R&D as an indicator of diminishing returns.
10This follows from the nonrival nature of inventions
(see Kenneth Arrow, 1962; Paul Romer, 1990).  "Assume an aggregate inventions "production function"
of the form N = RYZ, where R is a measure of
current R&D inputs and Z represents all other shifters
of this function: the accumulation of one's own past
R&D successes and also spillovers from the research
efforts of others. Then, y < 1 implies short-run diminishing
returns to current R&D, a "fishing-out" phenomenon
given the current "state of the art" Z. To the
extent that endogenous (and exogenous) forces "recharge"
the pool (in Evenson's [1991] terminology) and
change Z as the result of the direct and indirect
additions to the overall stock of knowledge, there need  not be diminishing returns to R in the long run. If R is
chosen so as to equate the value of its marginal prod-  uct, V(yN/R), to the marginal real cost of R, C, and if
V is the expected present value of an invention, one
can rewrite the first-order condition as N/R = C/yV,
which yields the major conclusion that the ratio of
inventions per unit of R&D is independent of the state
of general knowledge Z. Moreover, N/R will be declining
in V, the size of the market. For a more
detailed elaboration of such models see the "qualityladders"
approach of Gene Grossman and Elhanan
Helpman (1991), Caballero and Jaffe (1993), and Kortum
(1993).