VII. The Glass Half-Full?
After a long detour I come back to the
original question: why don't we know more
about the sources of productivity growth
and the causes for its recent slowdown?
Why does it feel as if the glass is still
half-empty? First note that in a trivial sense
we are doing better: the residual is smaller.
But that is the bad news, not the good. It is
smaller not because we have succeeded in
providing a substantively fuller explanation
of output growth, but rather because measured
output growth declined, leaving some
of these explanations in the dust. But we
are also doing better substantively. We know
much more about the components of growth
and where our measures are lacking. After
decades of work and contributions by Denison,
Jorgenson, Kendrick, and many others,
the conceptual and measurement underpinnings
of the growth accounts are in much
better shape today. We now have extensive
micro data on firms, their productivity, their
R&D expenditures, and other variables. We
have more data on individual investments in
education and training, and we also have
more asset detail on capital formation. More
international data are now available, with
the OECD both collecting R&D data and
computing TFP numbers for many countries,
and with Summers and Heston (1991)
providing comparable real GNP numbers
for many countries. Finally, we have much
more computing power and better econometric
techniques and frameworks for attacking
many of the problems that arise in
the analysis of such data. So what is still
missing?
We are caught up in a mixture of unmeasurement,
mismeasurement, and unrealistic
expectations. The productivity situation is
both better than we think and also worse. It
is likely that there have been significant
unmeasured productivity advances in many
of the service sectors (Bresnahan, 1986;
Baily and Gordon, 1988). Moreover, rising
R&D investment rates in the mid-1980's
and the recent rise in the number of patent
applications augur well for the future. Also,
productivity growth rates are probably underestimated
even in the "measurable" sectors
because they are based on "book value"
estimates of physical- and human-capital
stocks and do not reflect the capital losses
-the obsolescence that occurred, first as
the result of the various energy-price shocks,
and later as the result of increased international
competition and the melting away of
much of the previously existing monopoly
rents to both types of capital. That is actually
bad news. We are not as wealthy as we
thought, but productivity growth, based on
the lower remaining levels of input, is probably
higher than we have measured it.
A cautionary remark needs to be added
here: productivity growth contributes to the
potential for welfare, but it is not the same
thing. Welfare can move in the opposite
direction if the resources released by productivity
growth do not find adequate employment
in other, economically valuable,
activities (including leisure). Also the physical,
economic, and political environments
can change, both positively and negatively,
overwhelming the productivity story.23 So
even though I have been focusing on it here
tonight, it is not the be-all of economic
welfare. But as George Bernard Shaw used
to say when he was accused of money-grubbing:
"Yes, I know that money is not happiness,
but it is a pretty good substitute."
Nevertheless, the issues I have been discussing
here tonight are important. Much
depends on whether the "truth" is closer to
the upper ("measurable") line in Figure 1,
or the lower one. The country's mood is
affected by bad data and incorrect perceptions.
Are we really not much better off
than we were in the 1960's? Would we
really like to exchange the commodity assortment
we have today for that of
yesteryear? Our health system, warts and
all? The air pollution? The civil-rights situation?
The fear of nuclear war? These are
23Between 1970 and 1989, average hours of work
per worker went down by 7 percent, air pollution went
down significantly, and the crime rate came close to
doubling (Baily et al., 1993). Of course, these data are
also problematic (see Scott Boggess and John Bound,  1993).