among products there may be some where
current techniques will never be further
improved. Those products will have no real
cost reductions or TFP improvements in the
future, while others will enjoy huge advances
of productivity. My guess is that unlucky
countries (Bhutan, Nepal, Mongolia?) may
always lag way behind the pack, while luckier
ones (Taiwan, Argentina, Brazil?) may one
day hope to be among the world's leaders. So
convergence comes through as a general tendency,
and quite surely a general possibility,
for the production techniques used in making
any given product to improve as enterprises
using "backward" techniques learn of better
ones, and even more important, learn about
how to put them into practice. I do not believe
that much more than this can be said of convergence
as a real-world force. Wage rates for
given types of labor tend toward a rough
equality across regions in a country because
of the ease of migration in response to perceived
wage differences. The forces at work
internationally are both weaker and more
complex, but the big message here is that
the improvement of technique in any one industry
does nothing to improve the wages of
labor in just that industry. After an improvement,
the industry may end up hiring more or
less labor, but will presumably choose the
amount of labor so as to bring marginal productivity
into correspondence with market
wages. So technological improvement has an
effect on wages via supply and demand in the
national labor market, not through any direct
link from technical improvement to wages
(for given skills, etc.) at the level of the industry
or the firm.

As my final point, let me return to the
thought that the justification for perfecting the
functioning of the market system does not lie
only in reducing the efficiency costs associated
with each period's operation of the economy.
Perfecting a country's economic policy does
not only cause it to move from a path at
around, say, 90 percent of its potential output
to another equal to 95 percent of potential,
with the time path of potential output being
somehow given in advance. That gain would
certainly be a worthwhile gain, and it would
amply justify a lot of hard work involved in
achieving it. But that gain is still fundamentally
comparative static in nature.
What I hope to have evoked in this paper is
a sense that the perfecting of economic processes
can also in nearly all cases be justified
as greasing the wheels of the constant search
for new avenues of real cost reduction. To the
extent that economic reforms do so, they become
vehicles for bringing an economy to a
point where, year after year, new, cheaper, and
better ways are found of doing things, not just
in so-called "production" but also in such
mundane areas as merchandising, sales, finance,
insurance, and many more.
Some years ago, in a book that I edited called
World Economic Growth (1984), I wrote an
essay called "Economic Policy and Economic
Growth," in which I listed "13 lessons" that
I thought followed from the papers presented
in the volume, recounting the growth experiences
of countries as disparate as Ghana and
Taiwan, or Japan and Sweden. These lessonsbasically
focused on thinking about policies in
terms of their economic costs and benefitscould
easily be read as a reprise of the old
comparative-static story. But they were not
meanit as such-it is quite relevant that they
appeared in an essay concerned with world economic
growth. The point was that these sensible
policies emerged as part of a consensus of serious
economists, each an expert in his particular
country's history, focusing attention on the
process of economic growth.
A few years later, and as the theme of a
different concept, John Williamson (1990)
coined the term, the "Washington consensus.
" Williamson listed ten points, covering
territory very similar to my 13 lessons. He also
produced a pithy summary that captures the
essential thrust of both his and my listings:
"Macroeconomic prudence, outward orientation,
and domestic liberalization." He, too,
and the members of the Washington professional
establishment whose apparent consensus
led to Williamson's list, were not just
thinking of comparative-static gains as they
reached their conclusions about policy. They
were thinking about ways to move economies
from slow growth, stagnation, and even in
some cases negative growth, to a healthy,
prosperous flowering of economic progress.
Similar views were more recently affirmed by
Stanley Fischer (1993).

To me, the dynamics of real cost reduction
are at the very least an important piece of what