theories can indeed by constructed, as soon
as one gets away from foolishly restrictive
and inappropriate assumptions.
II
That brings me to the second and last
general point I had hoped to make. Suppose
one chooses to accept the apparent evidence
of one's senses and takes it for granted that
the wage does not move flexibly to clear the
labor market. By the way, my own inclination
is to go further and claim that commodity
prices are sticky too, at least downward.
But it is the persistence of disequilibrium in
the labor market that I want to emphasize.
How can we account for it?
There is, as I mentioned at the beginning,
a whole catalog of possible models of the
labor market that will produce the right
qualitative properties. Since I have surveyed
this literature elsewhere, I will just list a
half-dozen possibilities now, with the reminder
that they are not mutually exclusive
alternatives.
(1) There is Keynes's idea that caseby-
case resistance to wage reductions is the
only way that workers can defend traditional
wage differentials in a decentralized
labor market. The net result is to preserve
the general wage level or its trend, but that
is an unintended artifact.
(2) There is a complementary hypothesis
about the behavior of employers that I
have proposed myself: if employers know
that aggressive wage cutting in a buyer's
market may antagonize the remaining work
force, hurt current productivity, and make it
harder to recruit high-quality workers when
the labor market tightens, they will be less
inclined to push their short-run advantage.
(3) Pigou realized that widely held notions
of fairness, enforced by social pressure
or by legislation, might have to be part of
any serious account of wage determination.
George Akerlof has pursued this trail further,
documented the prescription of codes
of good behavior in manuals of personnel
practice, and showed formally that such
codes of behavior can be self-enforcing if
people value their reputations in the community.
Obviously there are no Emily Post
manuals to consult as regards the behavior  of laid-off workers, but you would certainly
not be astonished to learn that self-esteem
and the folkways discourage laid-off workers
from undercutting the wages of their
still-employed colleagues in an effort to displace
them from jobs. Reservation wages
presumably fall as the duration of unemployment
lengthens; but my casual reading
suggests that this pattern shows up more in
a willingness to accept lower-paid sorts of
jobs than in "thorough-going competition"
for the standard job. The cost to the worker
of this sort of behavior is diminished by the
availability of unemployment insurance. It
is worth remembering that the acceptance of
lower-grade jobs is itself a form of unemployment.

(4) I need only touch on the AzariadisBaily-
Gordon implicit-contract theory, because
it has been much discussed in the
literature. Here wage stability is a vehicle by
which less-risk-averse firms provide income
insurance for more-risk-averse workers, presumably
in exchange for a lower average
wage.5 It is now understood that the theory
works well only when workers have some
source of income other than wages, unemployment
compensation for instance. This is
not really a disadvantage in a world with
well-developed unemployment insurance
systems. In any case such implicit contracts
do not themselves account for unemployment.
Their effect is to reduce the average
amount of unemployment below the level
that would occur in a simple spot market.
The theory belongs in my list because I
suspect it does help to account for the habit
of wage inertia and therefore the vulnerability
of employment to unexpected fluctuations
in aggregate demand.
(5) Wherever there is collective bargaining
in our economy, the standard pattern,
'Unemployment generated by this mechanism is, in  a sense, voluntary. Workers reveal a preference for  steady wages over steady employment. But the aggre-  gate welfare cost of the system can still be reduced by  stabilization policies. This comment applies equally to  the social customs described in the preceding para-  graph of the text. One can ask why workers cling to  such costly conventions. It is the job of sociology to  answer that question. But it is the job of economics  to point out that, whatever the reason, the narrowly  economic cost of such conventions can be reduced by  the stabilization of aggregate demand.