send out the same kind of initial signalschanges
in the volume of sales-when it
wants a reallocation of resources as it does
when it wants a change in the general level of
wages and prices. In the first situation, given
the substantial efficiencies which flow from
long-term associations of suppliers with
customers and firms with workers, very cautious
and sluggish changes in wages and
prices are the optimal response to signals. A
large part of the adjustment is optimally
taken up as temporary variations in slack
adjustments in hours, layoffs and rehires,
inventory building and depletion, and rationing
of various kinds. Indeed, a large part of
economic life is dominated by the social
conventions, institutions, and patterns of behavior
that have evolved to avoid the chaos
and inefficiencies that would result from continuous
market clearing.
The signals which firms initially receive
when aggregate demand shocks occur are the
same as those for a resource transfer, but an
exactly opposite response is wanted-large
changes in wages and prices and small
changes in quantities or slack. Since the bulk
of the disturbances to which individual firms
and workers must adjust are relative or local
in nature, and since over long periods of
time micro efficiency tends to outweigh aggregate
resource utilization as a source of
economic welfare, wage- and price-setting
institutions have developed with a bias toward
the sluggish response called for by considerations
of micro efficiency. The cyclical
behavior of the aggregate wage and price
levels unfolds from the gradual overcoming
of that bias.
In the long run, those features of economic
relationships which make short-run price and
wage stickiness optimal and which rationally
prevent continuous market clearing disappear.
Specific assets are converted to capital.
Attrition and learning change the mix of
skills. Random changes get smaller compared
to systematic changes. The private returns
from specific customer-supplier and
worker-firm attachment shrink relative to the
returns from making appropriate adjustments
to changes in tastes, technology, and
other external developments. The rationally
based barriers to market clearing crumble.
We economists are indeed correct to insist on
the long-run efficacy of markets and the utility
of the market clearing paradigm as a way
of explaining long-term market allocations.
But we need not abandon the premise of the
rational maximizing calculus in order to explain
the structural stickiness of wages and
prices and the failure of markets to clear in
the short run. Both phenomena-long-run
market clearing and short-run stickinessultimately
derive from the same rational
aspects of human behavior.
Some of the consequences of this recognition
are nevertheless very troubling for
economic theory and theoretically informed
empirical research. In the new classical economics,
there is no need for empirical research
to determine how wages and prices
respond to demand shocks, given expectations
about the general price level. Pure
theory-the auction-market model-dictates
how prices and wages behave. Empirical research
is needed principally to tell us something
about the formation of expectations on
the general price level.
While contract theory and related research
has been developing rationally based foundations
for structural wage and price stickiness,
the work to date is essentially in the form of
existence theorems. That is, it tells us why
sticky wages are consistent with the rational
calculus. But it does not give us a theoretical
basis for specifying the two basic components
of macro wage adjustment: What
"laws" do firms follow, under implicit contracts,
in adjusting their wages, assuming the
stability of W, the wage norm? And what
does it take to produce a perceived "permanent"
change in that norm?
A full and complete microeconomic foundation
to wage adjustment with the power of
the auction-market model may never be
forthcoming. If that is so, we may have to
look to regularities derived from macroeconomic
empirical research to infer microeconomic
behavior. But this raises another set of
problems. While forward-looking expectations
play much less of a role in the macro
wage adjustment process I have outlined,
they are not completely absent in forming
perceptions about the wage norm. Hence the
force of the Lucas critique, though weakened,