In examining social decision mechanisms,
we have to take the Arrow conditions seri-
ously, but not as inescapable command-
ments. Our intuitions vary on these matters,
and Arrow's own theorem shows that not
everything that appeals to us initially would
really be simultaneously sustainable. There
is a need for some de-escalation in the grim
"fight for basic principles." The issue is not
the likely absence of rationally defendable
procedures for social decisions, but the rela-
tive importance of disparate considerations
that pull us in different directions in evalu-
ating diverse procedures. We are not at the
edge of a precipice, trying to determine
whether it is at all "possible" for us to hang
on.
VI. Procedures and Consequences
I turn now to the general issue, identified
earlier, of the contrast between relying re-
spectively on (i) the "rightness" of proce-
dures, and (ii) the "goodness" of outcomes.
Social choice theory, in its traditional
form, would seem to belong to the latter
part of the dichotomy, with the states of
affairs judged first (the subject matter of
"social preference" or "social welfare
judgements"), followed by identification of
procedures that generate the "best" or
"maximal" or "satisficing" states. There are
two issues here. First, can consequences
really be judged adequately without any no-
tion of the process through which they are
brought about? I shall also presently ques-
tion whether this presumption of process-
independence is the right way of seeing the
claims of social choice theory. Second, can
we do the converse of this, and judge proce-
dures adequately in a consequence-indepen-
dent way? This issue I take up first.
Sugden (1981, 1986), who has extensively
analyzed this dichotomy (between procedu-
ral and consequence-based views), explains
that in the public choice approach, which he
supports, "the primary role of the govern-
ment is not to maximize the social good, but
rather to maintain a framework of rules
within which individuals are left free to
pursue their own ends" (Sugden, 1993
p. 1948). This is indeed so, but even in
judging a "framework of rules" in this way,
we do need some consequential analysis,
dealing with the effectiveness of these
frameworks in letting individuals be actually
"free to pursue their own ends." In an
interdependent world, examples of permis-
sive rules that fail to generate the freedom
to pursue the respective individual ends are
not hard to find (see Sen, 1982b).
Indeed, it is not easy to believe that the
public-choice approach is-or can be-
really consequence-independent. For exam-
ple, Buchanan's support of market systems
is based on a reading of the consequences
that the market mechanism tends to pro-
duce, and consequences certainly do enter
substantially in Buchanan's evaluation of
procedures: "To the extent that voluntary
exchange among persons is valued positively
while coercion is valued negatively, there
emerges the implication that substitution of
the former for the latter is desired, on the
presumption, of course, that such substitu-
tion is technologically feasible and is not
prohibitively costly in resources" (Buchanan,
1986 p. 22). While this is not in serious
conflict with Buchanan's rejection of any
"transcendental" evaluation of the out-
comes (p. 22), nevertheless the assessment
of outcomes must, in some form, enter this
evaluative exercise. 32
There are, however, other-more purely
procedural-systems to be found in this lit-
erature. If the utilitarian tradition of judg-
ing everything by the consequent utilities is
one extreme in the contrast (focusing only
on a limited class of consequences), Nozick's
(1974) elegant exploration of libertarian
"entitlement theory" comes close to the
other end (focusing on the right rules that
cover personal liberties as well as rights of
holding, using, exchanging, and bequeathing