future wages; David W. Wilcox (1989), for social
security recipients who had been earlier notified of
changes in cost-of-living adjustments; Jonathan
Parker (1999), for payers of social security taxes
with predictable inter-year changes; Nicholes S.
Souleles (1999), for changes in disposable income
net of tax refunds; and James Banks, Richard
Blundell, and Sarah Tanner (1998), and Bern-
heim, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg
(2001), for retirees.
Textbooks explain such excess sensitivity by
a variety of frictions, particularly borrowing
constraints. For example, Rudiger Dornbusch
and Stanley Fischer (1987) say: "Given that the
permanent income hypothesis is correct [sic],
there are two possible explanations."40 They are
liquidity constraints for consumers and myopia
in their projections of future income.
Thus, we see the realignment that occurred
because of the life-cycle permanent income hy-
pothesis: excess sensitivity may occur, but only
in the presence of credit constraints or myopia.
Such a view cannot have been adopted because
of its empirical support. Few studies have tested
this proposition, but those that do have rejected
it. For example, credit constraints cannot ex-
plain the reduction in consumption of retirees.
And, neither myopia nor credit constraint can
explain the reduction in union members' con-
sumption at the time of wage declines scheduled
in their union contracts (Shea 1995, 996).
The adoption of the permanent income/
life-cycle hypothesis then must rest on theoret-
ical, not empirical, reasons. But the theory fails
to take into account norms regarding what peo-
ple think they should, or should not, consume.
Such a norm-based theory will nest Keynes's
psychological law. Consumption-income neu-
trality will occur only in a singular special case.
B. Consumption and the Role of Norms41
Why should consumption be overly sensitive
to income? This section presents an argument in
three steps. First, sociology gives motivations
for consumption that are very different from the
reasons for it in the life-cycle model. A major
determinant of consumption is what people  think they should consume. Second, what peo-
ple think they should consume can often be
viewed either as entitlements or as obligations.
Finally, in turn, current income is one of the
major determinants of these entitlements, and
obligations.
Sociology of Consumption.-The motivation
emphasized by sociologists for consumption is
very different from that in the life-cycle model.
Sociologists describe consumption as largely
determined by the norms regarding what people
should consume. These norms, in turn, are de-
pendent upon the individual's situation and also
who she thinks she is.
Two examples illustrate such dependence on
norms. Following Pierre Bourdieu (1984), peo-
ple's consumption of cultural goods-the liter-
ature they read, the music they hear, and the art
they buy-reflects not just their individual
tastes. The upper class should not make lower-
class choices. Correspondingly, the lower class
should avoid appearing above their station.42
The epithet "lace curtain Irish" illustrates. To
the users of this phrase, those lace curtains were
indicative of those violating their social place.
Weber's analysis of the relation between re-
ligion and savings further reflects the role of
people's views regarding who they should be.
In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism,43 Weber describes Calvinists as aspiring
to be "worldly ascetics." He concludes that
"economic acquisition is no longer subordi-  nated to man as the means for satisfaction of his
material needs.""44 Here the purpose of saving is
to live up to an ideal. The Calvinists are thrifty
because they think they should not be consum-
ing. That turns the motivation of the life-cycle