than a third of either the market or the house-
hold labor once required (Fogel, 2000).
Table 4 shows how sharply the U.S. distri-
bution of consumption has changed over the
past 120 years. Food, clothing, and shelter,
which accounted for about three-quarters of
consumption in 1875, accounted for just 12
percent in 1995. Leisure, on the other hand,
has risen from 18 percent of consumption to
67 percent.6 As Table 4 shows, the long-term
income elasticities of the demand for food and
clothing are below 0.5 and the elasticity of the
demand for shelter is closer to, but still below,
1.0. On the other hand, the long-term income
elasticities for leisure, education, and for med-
ical services are over 1.O.7
Table 4 differs from current official tabula-
tions of household consumption in two prin-
cipal respects. Official tabulations, with minor
exceptions, are limited to the out-of-pocket ex-
penditures of households. Table 4, however,
adds expenditures for education and health
care consumed by households but paid by gov-
ernment, employers, and other third parties.
My procedure does little to change the distri-
bution of consumption in 1875 but signifi-
cantly increases the education and health-care
shares of consumption in 1995.8
Table 4 also differs from official tabulations
by adding to the value of out-of-pocket expen-
ditures on leisure, the value of the time de-
voted to leisure (volwork). That time is priced
at the average hourly rate of compensation of
labor. The procedure increases the share of lei-
sure in consumption in both 1875 and 1995.
While leisure (volwork) remains a relatively
small share of expanded consumption in 1875,


it accounts for two-thirds of expanded con-
sumption in 1995.'
The failure to include the value of volwork
in the national income and product accounts is
perhaps the most glaring example of the cul-
tural lag to which I referred at the beginning
of this address. That omission also leads to a
significant underestimate of the long-term
growth rate of per capita income. Before ad-
justments for the increased quality of volwork,
the growth rate is increased by eight-tenths of
a point (from 1.8 to 2.6 percent per annum).
But adjustments for improvements in the qual-
ity of volwork might substantially increase
that figure, since leisure-time activities in 1875
were limited largely to church on Sundays and
carousing in bars during the rest of the week
(cf., Fogel, 2000). Despite some important
contributions to the development of an eco-
nomics of leisure (cf., Gary S. Becker, 1991;
Costa, 1998a, c; Daniel S. Hamermesh, 1998;
John Pencavel, 1998), the profession has far
to go before it catches up with the economy.
I1I. Shifting to Life-Cycle Data Sets for
Successive Cohorts and to Intergenerational
Data Sets
It is no secret that cross-sectional data sets
are cheaper to construct and more abundant