more hazardous than others and the social and
physical environment varies greatly among
neighborhoods. Private cost-benefit considerations
underlying such choices are the basis for
imputing the required values. Housing in crimefree
neighborhoods is expensive because people
are willing to pay more for greater personal
safety and protection of their property and because
crime-free neighborhoods are scarce.
Wages on hazardous jobs must be higher in
order to induce workers to expose themselves to
greater risk of life and limb. Observed price
differences across jobs and locations are the
implicit prices of characteristics, as in Figure
1, with z interpreted as job safety or neighborhood
safety.
Valuations generally vary among agents.
People with different tastes and incomes have
different bid and offer functions, but more is
involved. In most types of economic exchange,
the Law of One Price implies that marginal
valuations across buyers are identical and that
differences in tastes manifest themselves only in
differences in quantities consumed. For example,
the "last" loaf of bread is worth about the
same-its market price-to a person who consumes
one loaf per week as to a person who
buys one loaf per day.
The Law of One Price always applies to the
specific houses, jobs, or goods markets that
embody intangible characteristics, but not necessarily
to the intangible characteristics themselves.
Whether there is a unique market price
of a characteristic depends on whether or not the
characteristics embodied in existing varieties
can be recombined or remanufactured by buyers
into different varieties. The leading example of
such "combinability" is asset and portfolio
management. Risk and return of any single asset
are relevant only insofar as they affect the risk
and return on one's total portfolio. A portfolio is
a linear combination of various assets, so covariance
of risk on one asset compared to others
is the key risk component. The implied linear
restrictions (or no-arbitrage conditions) imply a
unique market price for risk.
But the fact is that combinability of characteristics
across varieties is not possible for most
other goods. If it is expensive to untie bundles
after they have been manufactured, sellers must
design their goods for specific tastes and assemble
packages of characteristics that appeal to
specific market segments. This generally results
in differing attribute prices across packages.
One cannot buy another unit of comfort for a
sports car in an independent "comfort" market.
Instead, a larger car must be purchased. A
worker on a risky job cannot subcontract little
bits of the risk to others in a secondary market.
It is all-or-nothing. The only way less risk can
be chosen is by finding a safer job. Workers
come prepackaged with various combinations
of skills and traits, some productive and others
counterproductive. Employers cannot detach
the less desirable ones from any single worker.
Rather, an entirely different person has to be
hired. In these cases the market equilibrium
price function p( z) usually is nonlinear, and the
gradient p'(z) generally depends on z itself.
Since there is no single market price for z,
different people have different valuations of it at
the margin. Type 0' and 02 buyers in Figure
1 serve as an example. In principle an average
of the two slopes at z1 and Zh is appropriate for
assessing the (marginal) benefits of a small independent
public project affecting z in some
application, with the average weighted by benefit
incidence of the project among different
types of people.
So many factors determine market prices of
goods in practice that the best chance empirically
for isolating the implicit value of safety
and environment is to examine specific goods or
jobs where these aspects dominate other considerations
of choice. For instance, my labormarket
study with Richard Thaler (1 976) on the
value of life was one of the first to systematically
examine wage premiums on very risky
jobs, where risk was measured as excess insurance
premiums charged by private companies
on worker compensation policies.
The revealed preference argument in Figure
1 applies directly to that problem. Here z represents
job safety and p( z) is estimated by
statistically comparing the smaller market wage
that workers are paid on safer jobs compared to
higher wages paid on riskier ones, other things
equal. Examining risky jobs empirically confines
the study to jobs with relatively low values
of safety, e.g., to those in the neighborhood of z,
in the figure. Since most workers hold relatively
safe jobs (located closer to a point like z,, in the
figure), people holding risky jobs surely place
smaller values on safety than the median per-