Inflation is the latest source of critical
volleys, and I will get to these in due
course. Meanwhile, the sampler of eco-
nomic masochism I have already provided
should serve as ample insurance against
complacency or smugness in considering
"what's right with economics." At the
same time, it strongly suggests that eco-
nomics, more than any other social sci-
ence, is afflicted with the common scold.
1 recognize that such a quick sampling
and cryptic quotes, selected to highlight
criticism, do a certain injustice to eco-
nomics and to some of the quoted econo-
mists whose kindlier observations have
been neglected in the process. But I am
also aware that my litany omitted a num-
ber of familiar flaws, for example, our
impounding of tastes and preferences in
ceteris paribus; the shortcomings of the
maximization principle in explaining con-
sumer and producer behavior, especially in
the short run; and our limited ability to
bring the claims of future generations into
our social utility functions.
Were I to serve as defense counsel for the
profession on this wide variety of indict-
ments, I would urge that we plead guilty
or take the Fifth on some, take to the de-
fense on others, and take offense at the
rest. Having paid my respects to the critics,
I intend no point-by-point evaluation or
rebuttal. This has been ably undertaken
by others.' Rather, my object is to gain a
more balanced perspective by focussing on
the quality, role, and contributions of
economics, especially to public policy. In
that undertaking, the first step is to exam-
ine the flank we expose to the public.
II. The Economist and the Public
When we turn from inside to outside
critics, the focus changes. We may think,
rightly, that freely confessing our weak-
nesses and airing our differences stimulate
responses and adaptations that strengthen
economics. Yet, wearing our purple hearts
on our sleeves has its price. It nourishes
the darkest suspicions about our art and
supplies live ammunition to outside critics
who have declared open season on econo-
mists. Witness the open sesame to the ed-
op pages for such recent thrusts as B erg-
mann's assault on economists in general
and Friedrich von Hayek's attack on
Keynesians in particular. With everything
from off-the-cuff phrases about being
"caught with our parameters down" to
tracts for the Times, we feed the hand that
bites us.
This is not a plea to do our self-flagel-
lating in secret or to mute our disputes
and conflicts. Open controversies, openly
arrived at, are part of the therapy that
keeps our profession healthy. Rather, my
plea is to the media and the opinion makers
to understand that appearances are de-
ceiving, that hard give-and-take is indeed
a symbol of strength, and that our areas
of agreement and consensus are vastly
larger than our areas of difference.
On the first point, observers from other
disciplines are of ten astonished at how
hard economists go at each other, how
readily they run the gauntlet of their col-
leagues' criticisms with no quarter asked
and none given-and, with few excep-
tions, all this within the framework of pro-
fessional respect and friendship. As Charles
Frankel put it, unlike other social sci-
ences, economics seems to have achieved
"a working etiquette which allows people
to disagree vigorously without engaging
in recrimination about 'unscientific' or
'unprofessional' behavior" (quoted in
Johnson (1973)).
What accounts for this? Part of it, one
can unblushingly say, is simply that so
many competent, tough, and rigorously