by the presence of underutilized labor and
other resources. Currently in the United
States the NIARU appears to be around
4-6 percent.
In some quarters this NIARU has even
been termed the "natural" rate of unemployment,
in one of the most vicious euphemisms
ever coined. Some have even gone
so far as to define "full employment" as
being the NIARU. But while 5-percent unemployment
might be barely tolerable if it
meant that everyone would be taking an
additional two weeks of vacation every year
without pay, it is totally unacceptable as a
social goal when it means unemployment
rates of 10, 20, or even 40 percent among
disadvantaged groups, with resulting increases
in poverty, homelessness, poor
health, drug addiction, and crime. Yet the
hard political fact is that at such a NIARU
the great majority of the voting population,
including most of the politically active upper
and middle classes, will have relatively
little personal experience of severe unemployment,
while nearly everyone will have
some direct experience of inflation. Many
seem to feel that if only prices would stop
rising they would benefit correspondingly by
having their income go further, giving relatively
little thought to the effect on their
incomes. Even those with large mortgages
or other debts, who would actually gain
from inflation, tend to concur in the notion
that they suffer from it. It is thus extremely
difficult to get political support for antiunemployment
measures that are perceived
as involving a threat of inflation, at least
until unemployment reaches 7 percent or
more, at which point unemployment becomes
a more widespread threat.
Actually it is the uncertainty as to the
rate of inflation, and not its level, that does
the damage. An assured, moderate rate of
inflation can be adapted to by adjusting
nominal rates of interest and the terms of
long-term contracts involving money payments.
The "menu cost" of changing price
tags and catalog quotations is probably less
important than the mental effort required
of consumers in forming an idea of what an
appropriate current price is for infrequently
purchased items, such as furniture or clothing.
An inflation rate assured to stay between
5 percent and 6 percent, say, might
even have advantages. Monetary policy
would be more powerful in stemming a
downturn in that very low and even negative
real rates of interest would become feasible
as a stimulus to investment. It might in
principle be easier to keep inflation within a
1-percent range between 5 percent and
6 percent, than to keep it within a 2-percent
range between - 1 percent and + 1 percent,
given the smaller real value of noninterest-
bearing moneys in circulation, even
allowing for the superior political focusing
power of a target of 0 percent as compared
to one of 5.5 percent.
The base of the income tax would be
broadened also, making it possible to have a
tax that is more progressive and more productive
of revenue with lower marginal rates
and less of a distortionary effect. A tax
based on nominal accrued income would in
effect be a tax on a base consisting of real
income plus a percentage of net worth.
While this is not what is meant by an ideologically
pure income tax, in terms of its
practical effects it can be deemed a superior
tax.
It is the possibility of substantial changes
in the rate of inflation, either up or down,
that does the damage. Such changes involve
a disappointment of expectations and a redistribution
of wealth and income derived
from a given national product that is capricious
and often inequitable, but it does not
of itself substantially reduce the amount to
be distributed. Unemployment, on the other
hand, directly and definitely reduces the
total product to be distributed. Unanticipated
changes in the rate of inflation, up or
down, may be considered to be a form of
legitimized embezzlement, whereas unemployment
is vandalism.
Nevertheless, the stance of the politicofinancial
establishment is still to look at the
bottom line as the ultimate reality, whether
of the corporation or the national budget,
and since money is the measure of all good
and evil in this kind of calculus, anything
that impugns the value of money is viewed
as a kind of sacrilege reinforced by a lurking
fear of starting down a slippery slope to