would be to give legitimacy and a stamp of
authority to physicians who practice in a more
cost-effective way.
My policy recommendations seek to achieve
a balance among the diverse values of efficiency,
justice, freedom, and security. The link
between the earmarked tax and the basic plan
would create a healthy tension between the desire
to increase benefits and the need to pay
for the increase in a responsible and equitable
manner. Competition among health care systems
in highly populated areas would widen
choice and foster cost-effective practice. The
private technology assessment center would
help to contain costs without the imposition of
controls or caps that might stifle innovation
and progress.
Are these recommendations politically saleable?
In the short run, certainly not. But neither
are any other proposals for comprehensive
reform. Indeed, for more than 20 years it has
been my view that the United States would not
enact comprehensive health care reform except
in the wake of a major war, a depression,
large-scale civil unrest, or some other event
that completely changed the political climate.
Why is the United States the only major
industrialized nation without national health
insurance? Many observers focus on the opposition
of "special interests," and that certainly
is a factor, but I do not find it a
completely satisfactory explanation. After all,
special interests are not unknown in Sweden,
England, Canada, and other countries that do
have national health insurance.
In 1976 I suggested four reasons for its absence
in the United States: distrust of government,
heterogeneity of the population, a weak
sense of noblesse oblige, and strong private
voluntary organizations such as nonprofit hospitals
and Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans
that carry out quasi-governmental functions
with respect to the financing and delivery of
health care (Fuchs, 1976). Upon revisiting
this question (Fuchs, 1991), I concluded that
the first three reasons were stronger than ever,
but the fourth had weakened considerably. It
is ironic that "the competition revolution"
(Fuchs, 1988b), which erodes the ability of
not-for-profit health care institutions to provide
a modicum of social insurance through
community rating and cost shifting, may in the
long run push the country toward national
health insurance.
My plan is certainly not a panacea; it would
be difficult to implement and others might
seek a different balance of values. Several aspects
require additional research. For example,
what should be the content of the basic plans?
How should the content change over time?
How should the plans be reimbursed from the
funds raised by the earmarked tax, and especially
how should reimbursement be risk adjusted
to take account of differences in plan
populations? Another problem is how to encourage
competition among plans where it is
feasible, while recognizing that a competitive
approach will not be desirable or possible in
areas of low population density. Considerable
research is needed on how the out-of-plan options
should be priced53 and how the providers
of such care should be reimbursed. Finally,
much thought should be given to how to reinvigorate
professional norms as a third instrument
of control, along with market competition
and government regulation.54
I conclude this tour of health economicspast,
present, and future-on a mildly optimistic
note. In the past three decades economics
has made a positive contribution to health
and medical care, and I believe that future contributions
will be even greater. Now that the
basic ideas of economics are gaining acceptance,
it will be more important than ever for
economists to master many of the intricacies
of health care institutions and technologies.
We will also have to consider the problems of
dissemination in order to insure that when we
agree on research results, these results are understood
and accepted by all relevant audiences
including the media, politicians, and
health professionals. Moreover, we must pay
more attention to values than we have in the
past. Through skillful analysis of the interactions
between values and the conclusions of
positive research, we will be able to contribute
more effectively to public policy debates. And,
13 For an interesting discussion of the "topping off"
problem, see Robert H. Frank (1996).
5 This would undoubtedly require research to uncover
the reasons for the erosion of professional control. See, for
example, Steven Brint (1994).