not inherited differences in natural abilities, are
the principal causes of wage inequality in society.
Since labor-market skills are costly to learn,
in market equilibrium their costs must be reimbursed
by offering larger expected earnings to
potential entrants, otherwise students would not
have the proper economic incentives to study
them. Since much of the cost of education and
learning are in time and opportunities forgone,
the force of interest weighs heavily in these
decisions and can cause remarkably large differences
in observed earnings, as equilibrium
phenomena.

But once a skill has been acquired, its economic
return is greatest if it is used as intensively
as possible. That the costs of acquiring
most skills are to some extent independent of
how intensively they are utilized makes it efficient
for people to specialize their skills and
trade with each other. There are huge economies
of scale in skills. Once acquired, a skill can
be used over and over again without diminishing
its stock. Indeed, the reverse may be true,
which provides incentives for students to acquire
skills early and to increase their work
hours after having become skilled.
Furthermore, individuals have different talents
and are better suited to some productive
activities than others. The principle of comparative
advantage holds true for human-capital
production as well as for international trade. It
accounts for why work is so specialized and
why each person knows such a small amount of
what is known in total. It even holds if people
are identical ex ante. Similar ideas have received
lots of attention lately in the fields of
industrial organization and international trade,
but are just as important, if not more so, for the
organization of work.

The cost basis that supports induced or "voluntary"
inequality has other interesting consequences.
Unequal rewards motivate people to
strive for superior performance and influence
their decisions to acquire skills. The two interact
because new generations of workers replace
older generations: the assignment of people to
jobs changes over the life cycle. A large share
of the growth in personal earnings over managerial
and other careers occurs at discrete promotion
points to higher-ranking positions.
Competition for promotions, to acquire greater
skill, show one's stuff, and get more powerful
and higher-paying positions, plays an important
role both in the internal dynamics of organizations
and in the overall economy. Uncertainty of
outcomes and the statistical aspects of promotion
and job assignments guarantee that competition
for superior positions occurs in every
form of economic organization. The need to use
the record of past performance to assess prospects
for other positions automatically gives
people incentives to try to influence the measures
that will put them in a superior category.
The strength of these incentives depends on
how much of a difference-in money, prestige
and perquisites-it makes to achieve a better
grade and a higher classification.
II. Valuing Diversity

Much of my research consists of applications
of the problem of analyzing markets for differentiated
products when the measure of differentiation
is naturally ordered from best to worst.
Market prices reflect both the costs and values
of the underlying attributes of goods. Agents
implicitly use cost-benefit analysis to choose
locations in the product spectrum, with buyers
comparing the market prices of alternative varieties
with their relative values in use and with
sellers comparing market prices with their relative
costs. Equality between demand and supply
for each variety sustains the market
equilibrium price-quality structure.
Consider a commodity that comes in two
different varieties. For example, there are highand
low-quality cars, better and worse houses
(or schools or neighborhoods), good jobs and
bad ones, fast and slow computers, and so on.
Let c represent all other goods consumed and let
Zh and z1 measure the high- and low-quality
characteristics of the goods in question. The
relative prices of the two varieties in terms of
other goods are Ph and Pl In the situation considered,
which is typical of many markets, individual
buyers and sellers are small compared
to the overall market and individually have no
market power. Suppose that customers purchase
either one unit of the differentiated product or
none. This is a leading case. Most people live in
exactly one neighborhood, hold one job, and
drive one car. Preferences are given by a utility
function u(c,z) of the usual kind. The choice set
consists of three distinct points in the (p,z)