Products are changed not to make them
better but to take advantage of the belief
that what is new is better. There is a
high failure rate in engineering not what is
better but what can be sold. The consumer-
the unpersuaded or disenchanted
consumer rebels. This is not a rebellion
against minor matters of fraud or misinformation.
It is a major reaction against a
whole deployment of power by which the
consumer is made the instrument of purposes
that are not his own.
VII
There are two conclusions to which this
exercise-to which incorporation of power
into our system compels us. The first, in
a way, is encouraging. It is that economists'
work is not yet done. On the contrary,
it is just beginning. If we accept the
reality of power as part of our system, we
have years of useful work ahead of us.
And since we will be in touch with real
issues, and since issues that are real inspire
passion, our life will, again, be pleasantly
contentious, perhaps even usefully dangerous.

The other conclusion concerns the state.
For when we make power and therewith
politics a part of our system, we can no
longer escape or disguise the contradictory
character of the modern state. The state is
the prime object of economic power. It is
captured. Yet on all the matters I have
mentioned the restrictions on excessive
resource use, organization to offset inadequate
resource use, controls, action to
correct systemic inequality, protection of
the environment, protection of the consumer-
remedial action lies with the state.
The fox is powerful in the management of
the coop. To this management the chickens
must look for redress.
Thus perhaps our greatest question. Is
emancipation of the state from the control
of the planning system possible? No one
knows. And in the absence of knowledge
no one certainly will suggest that it will be
easy. But there is a gleam of encouragement.
As ever circumstances are forcing
the pace.
In the United States the recent election
was fought, all but exclusively, over issues
in which the purposes of the planning system
or its major participants diverge from
those of the public. The question of
defense expenditures is such an issue. That
of tax reform is another. The deprivation
in housing, mass transportation, health
services, city services, is yet another-one
that reflects the relative inability of these
industries to organize and command resources.
The question of a guaranteed
income is another such issue. Its effect, as
I have noted, is on incomes outside the
planning system on the exploited in the
market system, those who are rejected by
both. The environment is such an issuewith
its conflict between the technostructure'
s goal of growth and the public concern
for its surroundings. Only wage and
price control was not an issue in the recent
election. That was almost certainly because
economists of orthodox tendency
on both sides found the prospect too embarrassing
to discuss.
I do not mention these issues with any
purpose save to show that the questions
that emerge when power is made a part of
our calculus are present and real. We need
hardly remind ourselves that political
issues are made not by parties and politicians
but by circumstance.
Once power is made part of our system,
we will not of course escape the political
contention that comes from dealing with
issues that are real. This brings me to my
last point. I do not plead for partisanship
in our economics but for neutrality. But
let us be clear as to what is neutral. If the
state must be emancipated from economic
interest, a neutral economics would not
deny the need. This is what economics now