lowance for the quality and variety of goods.
It excludes the household and treats all
government expenditure as final product. It
neglects the externalities of production and
consumption and the costs of growth proper,
for example, the dislocation of people. It
makes dubious assumptions about people's
ability to appraise and guard against the
dangers carried by jobs and products. And
there is much more to economic welfare
than can be captured in any long-term measure
of output: job stability; income security,
a fair distribution of opportunities and
rewards.
The economic role of government expanded
during the last half century and
more in large part in order to pursue the
social objectives that are not comprehended
in measured net national product. The result
is the mixed economy or welfare state in
which we now live and which is now the
object of attack.
Productivity growth is a useful focus of
discussion in relation to the current discontents
and the accompanying reappraisal of
our mixed economy for a combination of
two reasons.
To begin with, productivity, viewed as a
source of private earnings, exists in a state
of uneasy tension with the other welfare
objectives, which we pursue largely through
the government. The causes of the tension
need to be underscored.
First-an obvious point-the more income
that is diverted to social uses, the less
of any given aggregate remains under the
private control of income earners for their
own personal use.
Next, the size of the diversion and the
way it is made and used affects the level of
output and productivity, present and future.
That is partly because a host of government
activities are supportive of current output
and productivity, and many activities, including
some, like education, that are undertaken
for generalized social objectives,
are in the nature of capital formation.' In a
still more basic sense, moreover, and one
much neglected in current debates, the pace
of growth in a country depends not only on
its access to new technology, but on its
ability to make and absorb the social adjustments
required to exploit new products and
processes. Simply to recall the familiar, the
process includes the displacement and redistribution
of populations among regions and
from farm to city. It demands the abandonment
of old industries and occupations, and
the qualification of workers for new, more
skilled occupations. The extension of education,
with all its implications for shifts in
social status, in aspiration, and in political
power, is a requisite. Along the technological
path which we have followed, growth
also demands very large-scale enterprise
which establishes new types of market power
and alters the relations of workers and employers.
Viewed from another angle, the dependent
employment status of workers and
the mobility of industry and people imply a
great change in the structure of families and
in their roles in caring for children, the sick,
and the old. Because the required adaptations
can and do alter the positions, prospects,
and power of established groups,
conflict and resistance are intrinsic to the
growth process. To resolve such conflict and
resistance in a way which preserves a large
consensus for growth, yet does not impose a
cost which retards growth unduly, a mechanism
of conflict resolution is needed. The
national sovereign state necessarily becomes
the arbiter of group conflict and the mitigator
of those negative effects of economic
change which would otherwise induce resistance
to growth.2
The enlargement of the government's economic
role, including its support of income
minima, health care, social insurance, and
the other elements of the welfare state, was,
therefore-at least up to a point-not just a
question of compassionate regard for the
unfortunate, and not just a question of reducing
inequalities of outcome and opportunity,
though that is how people usually
think of it. It was, and is-up to a point-a
IIn 1976, government gross capital formation, including
investment in human capital, was estimated to
be just a trifle larger, 2 percent, than conventional gross
private domestic investment (see Robert Eisner).  2Compare Simon Kuznets.