Boulding assailing welfare economics for
its reliance on that holiest of holies, Pareto
optimality-when in fact "our lives are
dominated by precisely this inter-dependence
of utility functions which the Paretian
optimum denies"-thus also losing
contact with the real world.
In one form or another, variations on
Leontief's lament have been heard in many
another presidential address, to wit:
By F. H. Hahn (Econometric Society,
1968), who decried "the spectacle of so
many people refining the analysis of
economic states which they give no
reason to suppose will ever, or have
ever, come about...."

By G. D. N. Worswick (Section F of
the British Association, 1971), who
viewed the performance of economics
as "curiously disappointing," suggesting
that it has "a marvelous array of pretend
tools which would perform wonders
if ever a set of facts should turn up in
the right form."

By E. H. Phelps Brown (Royal Economics
Society, 1971), who judged the
usefulness of current work in economics
as ''not equal to its distinction" because
it is "built upon assumptions about human
behavior that are plucked from
the air."

By James H. Blackman (Southern
Economic Association, 1971), who noted
that models with sufficiently intriguing
mathematical properties can achieve
lives of their own even if they lead the
investigator further away from reality
and yet, "the profession's incentive
system tends perversely to reward this
kind of endeavor and to deflect the
attention of gifted economists from the
exploration of concrete problems and
the dirty work that entails."
By Sherman Maisel (American Finance
Association, 1973), who concluded
that most of the literature of
monetary economics is "non-operational"
since its prescriptions are too often
based on limited or false assumptions,
it by-passes critical operational problems,
and it ascribes too great validity
to its statistical tests.
By Barbara Bergmann (Eastern Economic
Association, 1974), who prefaced
her plea for more microsimulation to
incorporate "realistically messy information"
in our economic data base with
a few roundhouse swings at the economics
profession and the pointed observation
that instead of studying the
real nature of decision making, we
typically rush to make assumptions
"whose purpose in life is to let the
theorem emerge, all neat and provable."
Another favorite line of criticism and
attack focusses on the implicit value
premises of conventional economics. Gunnar
Myrdal and Robert Heilbroner chide
us for concealing the value judgments that
inevitably enter into our selection of problems
for study, choice of approach, definition
of concepts, and even gathering of
data. So a "value-free" economics is an
illusion-they urge economists to specify
their values and thus avoid biases and
make research more realistic.
Radical economists simply reject the
whole value system of conventional economics-
as they see it, the neoclassical
paradigm in its very bone and marrow
enthrones acquisitiveness and enshrines
the existing order. Paul Sweezy accuses
mainstream economists "of hiding the
facts, of making the uncontrollable appear
under control, of rationalizing a system
which condemns hundreds of millions of
people to lives of despair and starvation.
... "
