importance of IT has steadily increased, Figure
6 shows that the recent investment and consumption
surge nearly doubled the output contribution
of IT. Figure 7 shows that computer
investment is the largest single IT contributor in
the late 1990's, but that investments in software
and communications equipment are becoming
increasingly important.
Figures 8 and 9 present a similar decomposition
of IT inputs into production. The contribution
of these inputs is rising even more
dramatically. Figure 8 shows that the contribution
of IT now accounts for more than 48.1
percent of the total contribution of capital input.
Figure 9 shows that computer hardware is the
largest IT contributor on the input side, reflecting
the growing share and accelerating growth
rate of computer investment in the late 1990's.
Private business investment predominates in
the output of IT, as shown by Jorgenson and
Stiroh (1999, 2000b).33 Household purchases of
IT equipment and services are next in importance.
Government purchases of IT equipment
and services, as well as net exports of IT products,
must be included in order to provide a
complete picture. Firms, consumers, governments,
and purchasers of U.S. exports are responding
to relative price changes, increasing
the contributions of computers, software, and
communications equipment.
Table 2 shows that the price of computer
investment fell by more than 32 percent per
year, the price of software 2.4 percent, the price
of communications equipment 2.9 percent, and
the price of IT services 11.8 percent during the
period 1995-1999, while non-IT prices rose 2.2
percent. In response to these price changes,
firms, households, and governments have accumulated
computers, software, and communications
equipment much more rapidly than other
forms of capital.
E. Total Factor Productivity
The price or "dual" approach to productivity
measurement makes it possible to identify the
role of IT production as a source of productivity
growth at the industry level.34 The rate of productivity
growth is measured as the decline in
the price of output, plus a weighted average of
the growth rates of input prices with value
shares of the inputs as weights. For the computer
industry this expression is dominated by
two terms: the decline in the price of computers
and the contribution of the price of semiconductors.
For the semiconductor industry the expression
is dominated by the decline in the price of
semiconductors.35
Jorgenson et al. (1987) have employed
Domar's (1961) model to trace aggregate productivity
growth to its sources at the level of
individual industries.36 More recently, Harberger
(1998), William Gullickson and Michael
J. Harper (1999), and Jorgenson and Stiroh
(2000a, 2000b) have used the model for similar
purposes. Productivity growth for each industry
is weighted by the ratio of the gross output of
the industry to GDP to estimate the industry
contribution to aggregate TFP growth.
If semiconductor output were only used to
produce computers, then its contribution to
computer-industry productivity growth, weighted
by computer-industry output, would precisely
cancel its independent contribution to aggregate
TFP growth. This is the ratio of the value of
semiconductor output to GDP, multiplied by the
rate of semiconductor price decline. In fact, semiconductors
are used to produce telecommunications
equipment and many other products.
However, the value of semiconductor output is
dominated by inputs into IT production.
The Domar aggregation folmula can be approximated
by expressing the declines in prices of
computers, communications equipment, and software
relative to the price of gross domestic income,
an aggregate of the prices of capital and
labor services. The rates of relative IT price decline
are weighted by ratios of the outputs of IT
products to the GDP. Table 7 reports details of this
TFP decomposition for 1948-1999; the IT and
non-IT contributions are presented in Figure
33 Bosworth and Triplett (2000) compare the results of
Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000b) with those of Oliner and
Sichel (2000).
34 The dual approach is presented by Jorgenson et al.
(1987 pp. 53-63).
35 Dulberger (1993), Triplett (1996), and Oliner and
Sichel (2000) present models of the relationships between
computer and semiconductor industries. These are special
cases of the Evsey Domar (1961) aggregation scheme.  36 See Jorgenson et al. (1987 pp. 63-66, 301-22).