percent for the other unrecorded costs,
thus obtaining a charge corresponding to
14 percent of private GNP. But it will
prove to be important to take a look also
at the progress-yields obtained on this
immoderate assumption. I will build on
the fact that the 14 percent charge is ex-
cessive by a significant margin.
VI. Levels and Trends of "Objective" Yields
and Observations on Matters Calling
for Subjective Appraisal
The method by which the quantitative
yield-appraisals were obtained is based
on the discussion in Sections III and V
and the details are explained in the foot-
note below.40 Note that on the productiv-
ity-side we rely on Kendrick's estimate of
annual productivity-increase including the
effect of intergroup shifts (2.8 percent),
but the reader can convince himself that
the result would be influenced little by
the use of estimates that exclude the in-
tersector effect (for the most recent period
this would have been an increase of 2.6
percent p.a.). To me it seems reasonable to
relate also the intersector effect to prog-
ress-generating inputs.41
Many statements one would like to be
able to make about these results would be
much too risky for presentation. But there
are two statements which I consider to be
safe.
The first of these is that the present
average social rate of return from the
progress-activities is substantially in ex-
cess of 13 percent on the all-inclusive
cost-base, and substantially in excess of
18 percent on the cost-base limited to
institutionally profit-oriented progress-in-
puts ("reduced" cost-base). The rates of
13 percent and of 18 percent would imply
charging all capital consumption to prog-
ress, as if extension of service-life were
entirely costless ad infinitum except for
continued maintenance costs at the now
usual level. If we charged one-fourth of the
capital consumption to progress, and made
a moderate charge also for other unre-
corded costs, we would obtain a 31 percent
rate of return on the all-inclusive cost-base,
and a 55 percent rate on the reduced cost-
base. These particular charges rest on