been made by or for the National Research
Council. I will draw mostly on the first two
studies and briefly mention the third.
My principal intent is not that of criticizing
these studies or of evaluating their findings.
I want merely to identify some of the
issues that arise in their formulation, contrast
responses to these issues in different
professions, and comment on the methods
that have been or might have been proposed
or applied by the respective collaborating
professions. Those issues and
methods that I shall have time to refer to
are set out along the top of the table.
Each check mark in a cell of the table indicates
that a reference is made to that issue
or method in my discussion of that topic of
study.
1. The Case for Helium Conservation
This study is described in the preface to
the report of the Helium Study Committee
as "a task that had to be undertaken
quickly and completed with great speed."'
Likewise, on the concluding page (40), it is
called a "preliminary analysis.'
The principal current source of helium is
as an optional by-product of the production
of natural gas, in which it may occur in concentrations
ranging (by volume) from 10
percent on down with increasing costs of
separation. Present demand for various industrial
and space uses falls below present
supply, and a program of storage in the partially
depleted Cliffside gas field near
Amarillo, Texas, is in operation. The study
is motivated by the anticipation of a substantially
higher future demand.
The report of the Helium Study Committee
lists, on pages 35-36, five steps that
can be taken for the purpose of increasing
the rate of storage. I paraphrase:
Step i: Stop the current venting of
helium which has been separated from
natural gas allocated as a feedstock to
petro-chemical industries. Store the
helium instead.
Step ii: Designate helium currently
stored in Cliffside a "national strategic
reserve" for possible major technical
changes that may greatly expand future
demand.
Step iii: Reactivate presently idle
separation plants to reduce the release of