Barbara and Ann both think that their employer
should give them a nominal wage increase.
Another study, with a different form of questionnaire,
independently found a similar response.
Robert Shiller found that 49 percent of
a sample of the general public either fully or
weakly agreed with the following statement: "If
my pay went up, I would feel more satisfaction
in my job, more sense of fulfillment, even if
prices went up as much." An additional 11
percent of the general public were undecided,
while only 27 percent completely disagreed. As
in the case of Ann and Barbara, such opinions
are consistent with the view that workers think
their employers should give them a nominal
wage increase: they will be disappointed when
it does not occur. Shiller's finding may be similar
to the public's view of Ann and Barbara.
But, as he reports, it is also in stark disagreement
with the view of professional economists
that underlies natural rate theory. Ninety percent
of economists weakly or strongly disagreed
with the statement; 77 percent were in complete
disagreement.77
Such norms-regarding the wage or salary increase
that employees think they should receive--
can be economically consequential. They cause
the long-run inflation-unemployment trade-off
to be downward sloping. With such a norm, at
higher levels of inflation workers will not experience
disappointment from receiving lower
nominal wage increases than they think they
should receive; therefore, at higher inflation,
ceteris paribus, wage bargains will result in
lower real wages, which will reduce the relative
price that the firm wants to set, and therefore
raise the rate of sustainable employment. There
is a need for further research following Shafir,
Diamond, and Tversky and Shiller regarding
whether workers have norms regarding the nominal
wage increases they think they should receive.
High Inflation.-The opinions expressed regarding
Barbara and Ann, and also the opinions
of Shiller's respondents, suggest that the longrun
trade-off between inflation and employment
is upward sloping. These answers were elicited
in the United States and thus are reflective of
respondents' views in an environment where
inflation has been low. But if inflation is very
high and therefore also very salient, the answers
to such questionnaires could be very different.
And they could impart a very different shape to
the trade-off between macroeconomic demand
and steady-state inflation.78 In such cases, people
may gain satisfaction only from wage and
salary increases that exceed inflation. Such
norms regarding how employers should behave
will then necessitate higher real wages (to maintain
the same level of satisfaction) at higher
levels of inflation. The long-run inflationemployment
relation will then be downward
sloping. Such behavior gives a much stronger
rationale, even than current rational-expectations
credibility models (Barro and Gordon 1983; Kenneth
Rogoff 1987), why central banks should
maintain price stability. Failure to appreciate this
realistic possibility again may be another case in
which the absence of norms from utility functions
has unduly blinkered macroeconomic thinking.79