the value at which it can sell a unit of its capital
and its investment costs to produce a new unit
of capital. In this case, firms should invest up to
the point where the marginal cost of a new unit
of capital is the valuation of such a unit of
capital in the stock market. That valuation is the
market value of the firm's shares divided by its
capital stock, called the q-ratio. If markets are
efficient, q is also the expected discounted value
of current and expected future profits per unit of
capital.57 Since q-theory says that firms should
invest in capital up to the point where the cost of
an extra unit of capital stock is equal to the
present discounted value of the stream of earnings
from a unit of capital, again, as in ModiglianiMiller,
investment is independent of the firm's
finance decision.58
The empirical testing of q-theory also has a
striking parallel to the empirical testing of the
consumption function. Just as Campbell and
Mankiw showed that there was excess sensitivity
to current income in the consumption function,
Steven M. Fazzari, R. Glenn Hubbard, and
Bruce C. Petersen (1988) showed that investment
depends not just upon q, but also upon the
current cash flows. Furthermore, as in the standard
explanation of excess consumption sensitivity,
Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen similarly
suggest that credit constraints are responsible
for the dependence of investment on cash flow.
They continue with the Modigliani-Miller/
q-theory assumption that managers maximize
stockholder value. But they posit that the difference
in information between managers and
financiers results in a wedge between the cost of
internal and external financing. This is clearest
for firms that are credit constrained-so that
credit-constrained firms will be especially sensi-  tive to available liquidity.59 But, as with creditconstraint
explanations of consumption, empirical
evidence, such as there is, rejects this hypothesis.
Steven N. Kaplan and Zingales (1997) analyzed
the subsample of firms that Fazzari, Hubbard,
and Petersen had considered most likely to be
credit constrained. They find credit constraint to
be rare. Furthermore, they also found that those
firms with the least constraint had the greatest
sensitivity to cash flows.60
There is, thus, remarkable similarity between
the consumption function and the investment
function. In both cases, economic theory suggested
rejection of earlier views regarding the
role of current flow variables-current income
in the case of consumption, cash flow in the
case of investment. In both cases, empirical
investigation showed the existence of excess
sensitivity to the current flow variable. In both
cases, these rejections support the previous
Keynesian theory. In both cases, economists
have sought to explain the divergence between
practice and theory by the presence of credit
constraints. In both cases, the empirical evidence,
such as it is, does not support the case
that credit-constraint explanations explain the
theoretical anomaly.
A. Theory of Excess Sensitivity of Investment
to Cash Flow
Whatever the similarities, consumption and
investment differ in one major respect. In the
case of investment, economists are already
aware of a fundamental reason why investment
will depend on current cash flow. ModiglianiMiller
and q-theory both assume that managers