The other is the market; here, the aggregate
of individual decisions is acknowledged,
and the terms of trade adjusted until
the decisions of the individuals are
mutually consistent in the aggregate, i.e.,
supply equals demand.

The neoclassical theory, especially in its
competitive form, can be and has been
given a rich formal development. Parenthetically,
one cause for the persistence of
neoclassical theory in the face of its long
line of critics is precisely that for some
reason of mathematical structure, the neoclassical
theory is highly manipulable and
flexible; when faced with a specific issue,
it can yield meaningful implications relatively
easily. Although I intend to air
complaints and desires for change today,
I must express my unabashed admiration
for the accomplishments of the neoclassical
viewpoint. In its most formal statement,
we simply use for analysis the equilibrium
conditions of the individual agent and of
the market, without inquiry as to how they
come to hold. Yet even these statements
turn out to yield revealing insights in the
workings of resource allocation. Why have
medical costs risen so rapidly relative to
other prices since 1967? The upward shift
in demand due to Medicare and Medicaid
with a price-inelastic supply of physicians
and hospitals provides a simple straightforward
answer; I cannot really imagine
how a Marxian or a neo-Ricardian would
even approach the question, though I suppose
they might dismiss it as unimportant.
The explanation of environmental problems
as due to the nonexistence of markets
is similarly an insight of purely neoclassical
origin. The now-demonstrated fact that
flexible exchange rates are a feasible way
of conducting international finance is a
triumph of theoretical insights over practical
men's convictions. More broadly, the
shifts in long-run resource allocation as
motivated by returns and, in particular,
the absence of a secular trend in technological
unemployment to the perpetual
surprise of the layman fit in well with the
neoclassical formulation but have no ready
explanation in alternate models.
Of course, the implications of neoclassical
theory have also been conspicuously
falsified in important ways. Most notably,
the recurrent periods of unemployment
which have characterized the history of
capitalism are scarcely compatible with a
neoclassical model of market equilibrium.
A post-Keynesian world in which unemployment
is avoided or kept at tolerable
levels by recurrent alterations in fiscal or
monetary policy is no more explicable by
neoclassical axioms, though the falsification
is not as conspicuous.

Inequality in economic development
among countries and among groups and
regions within a country provides a second,
somewhat complicated difficulty for neoclassical
theory. A purely neoclassical answer
would explain differences in per
capita income by differences in physical
and human assets per capita. This of
course raises the further question, how
this came to be, a question which would
require a fully dynamic model to answer;
but I think the more compelling problem
is that the differences in income seem
much too vast to be explained by factor
differences. Indeed, in the presence of international
trade and especially international
capital movements, wage differences
should be very strongly reduced compared
with what would occur in autarchic states
where domestic capital is the limiting factor.
Hence, we come immediately to the
explanation that there are differences in
the production possibility sets of the
different countries. This conclusion is a
legitimate and important use of neoclassical
analysis; but obviously it raises new
questions, to which we will return.
I pass by the whole tangle of questions
relating to the holding of money and the
general level of prices. In its pure form,