differences. It is not that coefficients are noisy;
it is rather that they have the wrong sign. This
frequently occurs in the labor-market setting
when one estimates compensating differences
in wage functions. A good example involves the
trade-off between pensions and wages. Other
things equal, jobs with higher pension benefits
should have lower wages because the total
amount that employers are willing to pay for a
given worker should not vary with the compo-
sition of the compensation package and because
workers are willing to trade wages for pensions.
In Figure 3, the observed trade-off is shown by
the locus AB, which is the estimated market
relation of wages to pensions. Note that it is
positively sloped, but this is not because work-
ers do not view both wages and pension benefits
as goods. Instead, it reflects the fact that more
productive workers, who are richer, take some of
their income in the form of wages and some in the
form of pensions. The (pl offer function reflects
the bid by firms to low-productivity workers and
the (p2 function reflects the bid by firms to high-
productivity workers. Even if all workers had the
same preferences, as shown by the dotted offer
functions (the one to the northeast reflecting
higher utility), the market equilibrium would se-
lect points A and B. For any given worker, the
trade-off would be negative because then the (p or
0 curves would be relevant. But the market ob-
serves the AB line, because key productivity fac-
tors cannot be held constant. The AB line might
well be estimated with precision, depending on
the amount and nature of the data, but it identifies
neither a firm's nor worker's willingness to trade
off pensions for wages.
IV. Diversity and Specialization
Specialization, division of labor, and the or-
ganization of work socially create much of the
diversity observed in economics. In his compel-
ling discussion, Smith identified scale econo-
mies as the principal cause of specialization.
Instead of working alone and doing everything
by oneself, it is productive for a worker to join
teams and assign individual members to a few
mutually exclusive tasks. The division of labor
is one of the most important bits of economic
analysis at the extensive margin. How are pro-
ductive activities packaged and bundled to-
gether into jobs, and who works on them?
For the economy as a whole, the most impor-
tant reason by far for specialization and division
of labor are scale economies in utilizing ac-
quired skills. The returns to investing in a par-
ticular skill are proportional to the frequency of
its subsequent use. This makes it efficient to use
th'e skills one has already acquired as inten-
sively as possible and not to spread oneself too
thinly over a highly diversified portfolio. These
same connections between capacity and utiliza-
tion apply to all capital goods, not only to
human-capital varieties. The costs of construct-
ing an office building depend on its size; but
once it is built, it is efficient to keep the offices
as fully occupied as possible because the mar-
ginal cost of an unoccupied office is much
smaller than its average cost.
Specialization is optimal if learning new
skills involves significant fixed costs that are
only loosely linked to the intensity of subse-
quent utilization. Then it is best to learn a few
skills very well and use them all the time. These
basic forces produce enormous social gains
from trade. We could all build our own houses
and educate our own children. Instead, we use
markets to buy new houses built by expert
house builders and purchase educational ser-
vices for our children from expert teachers. The
houses are better and the children learn more.
Specialization and trade are important causes of
economic diversity among people in society.
Many aspects of economic diversity and its
manifestations in economic inequality serve
valuable social purposes. The fact is that sub-
stantial inequality is necessary for decentralized
societies to function. Many components of vari-
ance of earnings among persons are sustained