which we call implicit contracts must
provide for adjustments in wages that move
towards market clearing in response to unforeseeable
permanent changes in relative
economic conditions. Finally, however, the
substantial penalties which can be suffered if
firms and workers respond to erroneous signals
by prematurely severing association call
for informal arrangements and agreements
that produce a very slow and cautious adjustment
of wages even to what ultimately
turn out to be permanent changes in relative
conditions.7

It is not surprising, given the large social
returns to continuity of association and the
very great difficulty of distinguishing temporary
from permanent changes in economic
circumstances, that society should have developed
social conventions and informal
agreements that minimize the sending of premature
signals for a reallocation of resources.


III. Response to Aggregate Demand Shocks
So far we have considered a world in
which only relative or local changes are permitted,
a world in which the nominal and
real value of the general wage level, or the
wage "norm," was fixed. Now impose aggregate
demand shocks on such a world,
optimal adjustment to which requires a
change in the path of average prices and
wages. (For simplicity of exposition we will
be considering only aggregate demand
shocks, and exclude aggregate shocks to the
supply curve, like those arising from OPECimposed
oil price increases or from crop
shortages. We can thus assume that the equilibrium
solution will not call for changes in
aggregate real wages.) An efficient system of
implicit contracts must obviously provide for
adjustments in the nominal wages of individual
firms when changes occur in the average
level of nominal wages, W. Under the social
conventions and understandings which govern
wage determination, there is a rebuttable
presumption that-barring the existence of
circumstances which call for changes in real
and relative wages-nominal wages in each
firm will be adjusted in line with observed
changes in prices and wages generally. But
this process of wage determination does not
generate prompt and flexible adjustment of
aggregate nominal wages to nominal shocks.
A change in the average level of wages is the
product of changes in wages by individual
firms. To the extent that individual wage
adjustments must wait on changes in the
average, aggregate nominal wage flexibility
will not be a characteristic of the system.
And, as discussed below, this is also true, but
to a somewhat lesser degree, of the wage
response to price changes. Given the substantial
costs of sticky nominal wages to
society as a whole and to individual firms
and their workers, is there not some other
adjustment mechanism which would generate
a prompt and flexible nominal wage response,
preserving relative wages but producing
the desired nominal flexibility?
Several lines of inquiry suggest themselves.
First, why are not nominal wages explicitly
indexed to some aggregate nominal indicator,
producing the appropriate change in W
in response to aggregate demand shocks?
Second, even with relative wage stickiness,
would not rational firms and their workers
forecast the ultimate equilibrium change in
W and promptly set individual wages accordingly?
And, finally, if that is not feasible,
why do implicit contracts not permit
swifter and larger nominal wage adjustments
by individual firms under the force of aggregate
nominal shocks?
