The second is that, since the early years
of the energy crisis in the 1970's, there have
been enthusiastic portrayals of currently
available technologies, ranging from light
bulbs to electric motors, double-glazed windows
and improved internal-combustion engines,
that for some reason have not been
successfully marketed. The interest continues,
and the recent National Academy of
Sciences study gave sympathetic attention,
but no analysis, to a number of proposals
for residential, commercial, industrial, and
transportation energy management and for
improved electricity production and fuel
supply and concluded that, including reductions
in CFC's, "The United States could
reduce or offset its greenhouse gas emissions
by between 10 and 40 percent of 1990
levels at low cost or at some net saving, if
the proper policies are implemented" (1991
p. 73).
All of these ideas are completely orthogonal
to the econometric estimates. The
Academy panel that produced the report
was unable to offer an explanation for why
these low-cost or negative-cost technologies
have not caught on. Its quantitative assessment,
including an allowance for elimination
of CFC's, ranged from as little as 10
percent to as much as 40 percent of current
U.S. emissions; CFC's aside, their range of
possibility is from zero to about 30 percent.
Whatever the correct figure, this is probably
a once-and-for-all backlog of accumulated
technologies, which once exploited may be
permanent but not progressive. But the
strong suggestion is that there is a lot to be
accomplished in the next two or three
decades.
VIII
With these qualifications, let us look at
that 2 percent of GNP as a permanent
reduction over the coming century. I consider
it altogether improbable that the developing
world, at least for the next several
decades, will incur any significant sacrifice
in the interest of reduced carbon (nor would
I advise developing countries to do so).
Anything done to reduce emissions in China,
India, or Nigeria will be at the expense of
the richer countries.
Financing energy conservation, energy
efficiency, and switching from high-carbon
to lower-carbon or noncarbon fuels in Asia
and Africa would not only be a major economic
enterprise but a complex effort in
international diplomacy and politics. If successful,
it would increase the costs to the
developed world by at least another percent
or two on top of the 2 percent I mentioned.
It is furthermore not easy to hide the transfer
of resources on the order of a couple of
hundred billion dollars, dollars "budgeted"
somehow or other, compared with hiding
some of the costs due to regulation, such as
automobile fuel-efficiency standards in the
United States. The kind of thing we are
talking about is inducing the Chinese,
through our somehow offsetting their cost,
to forgo a massive electrification based on
coal and the cheapest coal-combustion technology.
Without engaging in blackmail, the
Chinese can assert that it is not in their
interest to do that at their own expense,
even if they are the keystone of a "social
contract" and no other nation will do anything
unless the Chinese fully participate.
I shall sketch what I can imagine as a
major attack on the greenhouse problem.
And I should be explicit about what I cannot
imagine. For reasons that I would be
delighted to elaborate but for which I cannot
take space here, a universal uniform
carbon tax is not a solution that I can imagine.
My reason is simple. A carbon tax sufficient
to make a big dent in the greenhouse
problem would have to be roughly equivalent
at least to a dollar per gallon on motor
fuel, and for the United States alone such a
tax on coal, petroleum, and natural gas
would currently yield close to half a trillion
dollars per year in revenue. No greenhouse
taxing agency is going to collect a trillion
dollars per year in revenue; and no treaty
requiring the United States to levy internal
carbon taxation at that level, keeping the
proceeds, would be ratified by the Senate.
Reduce the tax by an order of magnitude
and it becomes imaginable, but then it becomes
trivial as greenhouse policy.5
5A careful treatment of the universal carbon tax is
provided by James M. Poterba (1991).