By DANIEL MCFADDEN*
You cannot simply tell a person in dire
need, wait for the market to take care of
you. That is a most callous thing to say,
and only makes a person feel owned, and  with no control over his life.
Letter to the Editor,
New York Times, 2005
[I]t is not enough to simply liberate people
and assume that they will automatically
pursue economic prosperity. People  need to be instilled with certain beliefs,
like the belief that ... individuals have the
power to shape their own destiny. ... It's
important to understand the beliefs that
encourage people to work hard and grow
rich.
David Brooks,
New York Times, 2005
I. Consumers and Markets
Economic theories and ideologies are
founded on the principle that consumers have
well-defined preferences, and consistently behave
to advance their self-interest. Jeremy
Bentham (1789) said, "My notion of man is
that ... he aims at happiness ... in every thing he
does." Herbert Simon (1957) said, "The rational
man of economics is a maximizer, who will
settle for nothing less than the best." Some
economists have even taken self-interest to explain
choice tautologically:
t Presidential Address delivered at the one hundred seventeenth
meeting of the American Economic Association,  January 7, 2006, Boston, MA.
* Department of Economics, University of California,  Berkeley, 549 Evans Hall, #3880, Berkeley, CA 94720  (e-mail: mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu). This paper was  prepared with the support of the National Institute of Aging  and the E. Morris Cox Endowment, University of Califor-  nia, Berkeley. I thank particularly Joachim Winter, and also  Sam Bowles, Frank Caro, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Flo-  rian Heiss, Dana Goldman, Elizabeth Goldstein, Arie
Kapteyn, Alan Krueger, Byunghill Jun, Rosa Matzkin, Ellen  Peters, Richard Suzman, David Weir, Robert Willis, and
David Wise for comments and suggestions.
An article can have no value unless it has
utility. No one will give anything for an
article unless it yield him satisfaction.
Doubtless people are sometimes foolish,
and buy things, as children do, to please a
moment's fancy; but at least they think at
the moment that there is a wish to be
gratified. Doubtless, too, people often buy
things which, though yielding pleasure for
the moment, or postponing pain, are in the
end harmful. But here ... we must accept
the consumer as the final judge. The fact
that he is willing to give up something in
order to procure an article proves once for
all that for him it has utility,-it fills a
want.
Frank Taussig, 1912
Consumers who know their own tastes, and
are relentlessly self-interested and self-reliant,
relish choice, and welcome market opportunities
that expand their options. Most economists
accept this concept of the consumer, and the
attendant economic theory that demonstrates
the efficiency and Pareto optimality of decentralized,
competitive markets. Over the past 30
years in the United States and elsewhere, these
market-oriented views have driven economic
policy, leading to deregulation of air and truck
transportation, telecommunications, and energy
markets; establishment of property rights and
markets to manage environmental externalities;
and globalization of international markets for
goods, capital, and services. Notable successes
were the deregulation of truck and air transportation,
and of telecommunications, where dysfunctional
regulation worked at cross-purposes
to competition. Another success was making
air pollution a property right, allowing Coasian  markets to internalize environmental externalities.
There have also been striking failures,
such as the breakdown of the incompletely deregulated
energy market in California a few
years ago, the rail transport deregulation in
Great Britain which got wrong the incentives
for track maintenance, and the British system
of private retirement accounts which allowed
5