C. Constant Quality Price Indexes
The behavior of semiconductor prices is a
severe test for the methods used in the official
price statistics. The challenge is to separate ob-
served price changes between changes in semi-
conductor performance and changes in price
that hold performance constant. Achieving this
objective has required a detailed understanding
of the technology, the development of sophisti-
cated measurement techniques, and the intro-
duction of novel methods for assembling the
requisite information.
Ellen R. Dulberger (1993) of IBM introduced
a "matched model" index for semiconductor
prices. A matched model index combines price
relatives for products with the same perfor-
mance at different points of time. Dulberger
presented constant quality price indexes based
on index number formulas, including the
[Irving] Fisher (1922) ideal index used in the
U.S. national accounts. 1 1 The Fisher index is the
geometric average of the familiar Laspeyres and
Paasche indexes.
W. Erwin Diewert (1976) defined a superla-
tive index number as an index that exactly
replicates aflexible representation of the under-
lying technology (or preferences). A flexible
representation provides a second-order approx-
imation to an arbitrary technology (or prefer-
ences). A. A. Konus and S. S. Byushgens
(1926) first showed that the Fisher ideal index is
superlative in this sense. Laspeyres and Paasche
indexes are not superlative and fail to capture
substitutions among products in response to
price changes accurately.
Grimm (1998) combined matched model
techniques with hedonic methods, based on an
econometric model of semiconductor prices at
different points of time. A hedonic model gives
the price of a semiconductor product as a func-
tion of the characteristics that determine perfor-
mance, such as speed of processing and storage
capacity. A constant quality price index isolates
the price change by holding these characteristics
of semiconductors fixed.
Beginning in 1997, the U.S. Bureau of Labor