The title of this paper summarizes the
two-fold theme to which I want to address
myself this evening. First, the mainstream
of economic theory sacrifices far too much
relevance in its insistent pursuit of ever
increasing rigor. And, second, we economists
pay too little attention to the changing
institutional environment that conditions
economic behavior. We do not often
enough reexamine our basic postulates in
light of changes in this environment, and,
perhaps more important, we shy away
from the big questions about how and why
the institutional structure is changingand
where it is taking us.'
I
Economists pride themselves on belonging
to the most "scientific" of the social
sciences. The justification for this contention
lies in the growing resemblance between
the nature of the analytical tools
used in economics and in the natural
sciences-above all, the increasing use of
mathematical tools in theoretical analysis
and the development of sophisticated
mathematical and statistical techniques in
empirical work. Today, mathematically
formulated economic theory, the development
of econometric techniques, and the
sophisticated application of econometric
methods to the "testing of hypotheses" in
a variety of applied fields constitute the
core of the science of economics.2
What is science? One brief definition
runs: "A systematic knowledge of the
physical or material world." Most definitions
emphasize the two elements in this
definition: (1) "systematic knowledge"
about (2) the real world. Without pushing
this definitional question to its metaphysical
limits, I merely want to suggest that if
economics is to be a science, it must not
only develop analytical tools but must also
apply them to a world that is now observable
or that can be made observable
through improved methods of observation
and measurement. Or in the words of the
Hungarian mathematical economist J'anos
Kornai, "In the real sciences, the criterion
is not whether the proposition is logically
true and tautologically deducible from
earlier assumptions. The criterion of 'truth'
is, whether or not the proposition corresponds
to reality" (p. 9, his italics). (Compare
Wassily Leontief 1966, p. 23.)
One of our most distinguished historians
of economic thought, George Stigler, has
stated that: "The dominant influence upon
the working range of economic theorists is
the set of internal values and pressures of