all costs, whether easily countable or not,
and evaluate all rewards, however hard
they are to evaluate, is one which emerges
squarely out of economics and which is at
least a preliminary guideline in the formation
of the moral judgment, in what might
be called the "economic ethic."
Nevertheless, the economic ethic, or the
total cost-benefit principle, is subject to
sharp challenge. Two principal criticisms
have been made of it, the first of which I
think is probably not valid, and the second
of which may be valid under limited
circumstances. The criticism that I think
is not valid is that cost-benefit analyses in
particular, or economic principles in general,
imply selfish motivation and an insensitivity
to the larger issues of malevolence,
benevolence, the sense of community
and so on. It is quite true, as shown
above, that economists have neglected the
problem of malevolence and benevolence.
Nevertheless, our attitudes towards others
can be measured at least as well as we can
measure other preferences, either by some
principle of "revealed preference" or by
direct questioning. It is entirely within the
competence of economics, for instance, to
develop a concept of the "rate of benevolence"
which is the quantity of exchangeables,
as measured in real dollars, which a
person would be willing to sacrifice in
order to contemplate an increase of one
real dollar in the welfare of another person.
If the rate of benevolence is zero, of
course, we have indifference or pure selfishness;
if the rate of benevolence is negative
we have malevolence, in which case
people need compensation in order to contemplate
without loss the increased welfare
of an enemy, or in reverse would be
willing to damage themselves in order to
damage another. The rate of malevolence
then would be the amount in real dollars
one would be prepared to damage one's
self in order to damage another person to
the extent of one dollar. These rates of
malevolence incidentally are frequently
quite high. It apparently costs the United
States about four dollars to do one dollar's
worth of damage in Vietnam, in which
case our rate of benevolence towards
North Vietnam is at least minus four. In
determining cost-benefit analysis we can
easily include rates of benevolence and
malevolence, adding the benefits and subtracting
the costs to those toward whom
we are benevolent, multiplied of course by
the rate of benevolence, and subtracting
the benefits and adding the costs, similarly
modifed, to those towards whom we
are malevolent.
The concept of a rate of benevolence, incidentally,
is at least a partial solution to
the perplexing question of interpersonal
comparisons of utility around which economists
have been doing a ritual dance for
at least three generations. Any decision
involving other people obviously involves
these interpersonal comparisons. They are
made, of course, inside the mind of the decision-
maker and what his rates of benevolence
or malevolence are likely to be is
determined by the whole social process in
which he is embedded. Surely something
can be said about this. We are, for instance,
likely to be more benevolent to
people who are going to vote for us and
perhaps malevolent to people who are
going to vote against us. The economic
theory of democracy indeed as developed
by Anthony Downs and others is a very
good example of what I have sometimes
called "economics imperialism," which is
an attempt on the part of economics to
take over all the other social sciences.
The second attack on the "economic
ethic" is more fundamental and harder to
repulse. This is the attack from the side
of what I have elsewhere called the "heroic
ethic" [1]. In facing decisions, especially
those which involve other people, as