but, by the assumption that average construction
cost is declining, since Yi >0,
(4) K(y2-y1)/(y2-y1)> K(y2)/y2.
Substituting this into (3) we have at once
P2> K(Y2)/Y2

or

(5) P2Y2 > K(y2).

Inequality (5) is our result. For it proves
that any prices which satisfy equilibrium
requirements (1) and (2) must permit a second-
period entrant using the same techniques
to build capacity Y2 from the ground
up, at cost K(y2), to price slightly below
anything the incumbent can charge and yet
recover his costs; and that in doing so, the
entrant can earn a profit.
Thus, our intertemporal natural monopolist
cannot quote, at time zero, any prices
capable of preventing the takeover of some
or all of his market. Moreover, this is so
despite the waste, in the form of replication
of the incumbent's plant, that this entails.
That, then, is the end of the formal argument,
the proof that here the invisible hand
manifests weakness that is, perhaps, unexpected.


You will all undoubtedly recognize that
the story as told here in its barest outlines
omits all sorts of nuances, such as entrants'
fear of responsive pricing, the role of bankruptcy,
depreciation of capital, and the like.
This is not the place to go into these matters
for it is neither possible nor appropriate here
for me to go beyond illustration of the logic
of the new analysis.

IV. Concluding Comments

Before closing let me add a word on policy
implications, whose details must also be left
to another place. In spirit, the policy conclusions
are consistent with many of those
economists have long been espousing. At
least in the intratemporal analysis, the heroes
are the (unidentified) potential entrants who
exercise discipline over the incumbent, and
who do so most effectively when entry is
free. In the limit, when entry and exit are
completely free, efficient incumbent monopolists
and oligopolists may in fact be able to
prevent entry. But they can do so only by
behaving virtuously, that is, by offering to
consumers the benefits which competition
would otherwise bring. For every deviation
from good behavior instantly makes them
vulnerable to hit-and-run entry.
This immediately offers what may be a
new insight on antitrust policy. It tells us
that a history of absence of entry in an
industry and a high concentration index may
be signs of virtue, not of vice. This will be
true when entry costs in our sense are negligible.
And, then, efforts to change market
structure must be regarded as mischievous
and antisocial in their effects.
A second and more obvious conclusion is
the questionable desirability of artificial
impediments to entry, such as regulators were
long inclined to impose. The new analysis
merely reinforces the view that any proposed
regulatory barrier to entry must start off
with a heavy presumption against its adoption.
Perhaps a bit newer is the emphasis on
the importance of freedom of exit which is as
crucial a requirement of contestability as is
freedom of entry. Thus we must reject as
perverse the propensity of regulators to resist
the closing down of unprofitable lines of
activity. This has even gone so far as a
Congressional proposal (apparently supported
by Ralph Nader) to require any plant
with yearly sales exceeding $250,000 to provide
fifty-two weeks of severance pay and to
pay three years of taxes, before it will be
permitted to close, and that only after giving
two years notice!

There is much more to the policy implications
of the new theory, but I will stop here,
also leaving its results relating to empirical
research for discussion elsewhere.
Let me only say in closing that I hope I
have adequately justified my characterization
of the new theory as a rebellion or an uprising.
I believe it offers a host of new analytical
methods, new tasks for empirical
research, and new results. It permits reexamination
of the domain of the invisible
hand, yields contributions to the theory of