pect if the unemployment were voluntary
search activity. Even if it were voluntary,
search activity on such a large scale would
surely be socially wasteful. The only
reason anyone might regard so high an
unemployment rate as an equilibrium
and social optimum is that lower rates
cause accelerating inflation. B3 ut this is
almost tautological. TIhe inferences of equilibrium
anid optimality would be more
conivincing if they were corroboratecI by
direct evidence.
IV. Why is There Inflation without
Aggregate Excess Demand?
Zero-inflation unemployment is not
wholly voluntary, not optimal, I might
eveni say not natural. In other words, the
economy has an inflationary bias: WNhen
labor markets provide as many jobs as
there are willing workers, there is inflation,
perhaps accelerating inflation. Why?
The Phillips curve has been an empirical
finding in search of a theory, like Pirandello
characters in search of an author.
One rationalization might be termecl a
theory of stochastic macro-equilibrium:
stochastic, because random intersectoral
shocks keep individual labor markets in
diverse states of disequilibrium; macroequilibrium,
because the perpetual flux
of particular markets produces fairly
defnite aggregate outcomes of unemployment
and wages. Stimulated by Phillips's
1958 findings, Richard Lipsey proposed a
model of this kind in 1960, and it has
since been elaborated by Archibald, pp.
212-23 and Holt, pp. 53-123 and 224-56
in Phelps et. al., and others. I propose
now to sketch a theory in the same
spirit.
It is an essential feature of the theory
that economy-wide relations among employment,
wages, and prices are aggregations
of diverse outcomes in heterogeneous
markets. The myth of macroeconomics is
that relations among aggregates are enlarged
analogues of relations among corresponding
variables for individual households,
firms, industries, markets. The myth
is a harmless and useful simplification in
many contexts, but sometimes it misses
the essence of the phenomenon.
Unemployment is, in this model as in
Keynes reinterpreted, a disequilibrium phenomenon.
Money wages do not adjust
rapidly enough to clear all labor markets
every clay. Excess supplies in labor markets
take the form of unemployment, and
excess demands the form of unfilled
vacancies. At any moment, markets vary
widlely in excess demand or supply, and
the economy as a whole shows both
vacancies and unemployment.
The overall balance of vacancies and
unemployment is determined by aggregate
demand, and is therefore in principle subject
to control by overall monetary and
fiscal policy. Higher aggregate demand
means fewer excess supply markets and
more excess demand markets, accordingly
less unemployment and more vacancies.
In any particular labor market, the rate
of increase of money wages is the sum of
two components, an equilibrium component
and a disequilibrium component. The
first is the rate at which the wage would
increase were the market in equilibrium,
with neither vacancies nor unemployment.
The other component is a function of excess
demand and supply-a monotonic
function, positive for positive excess demand,
zero for zero excess demand, nonpositive
for excess supply. I begin with
the disequilibrium component.
Of course the disequilibrium components
are relevant only if disequilibria
persist. Why aren't they eliminated bv the
very adjustments they set in motion ?
Workers will move from excess supply
markets to excess demand markets, and
from low wage to high wage markets.
Unless they overshoot, these movements
are equilibrating. The theory therefore