the real economy actually is at any time "in
equilibrium." Rather, the notion of equilibrium
is a first approximation, a reference
point or path, like the cycles of Ptolemy
without the epicycles and the eccentricity.
If the market were to extend to all pertinent
economic decisions over the entire
period considered, the result of an intertemporal
equilibrium would be an "efficient"
path of the economy in the limited
sense that no one can be made better off at
any time without someone being made
worse off at some time. Where market
power interferes with competition, or where
important economic decisions are made at
government levels, the instinct of the neoclassical
economist is to recommend that
legislation, regulation, the use of suitable
incentives, or direct government decision
either restore or mimic the operation of the
competitive market.

In the present context, an important trait
of the neoclassical model is that it does not
postulate one sole primary resource, be it
labor, energy or any other, whose scarcity
controls that of all other goods, and which
thereby becomes a natural unit of value for
all other goods. The model of production is
such that-not by logical necessity, but as
an empirical fact--any primary input to
production can be substituted to some extent
for any other. If such substitution does
not take place within one-and-the-same
production process, then it can still come
about through suitable changes in the levels
of several processes and in the inputs to
these. In this view "the energy problem" is
not one of just "saving energy," regardless
of the cost in other resources. It is rather
one of seeing to it that the increasing real
cost of domestic energy extraction and supply,
and the increased market power of
OPEC, are-over time-reflected in the
real prices of primary energy forms relative
to other primary inputs, and thereby in different
degrees in the prices of all other
goods and services. In the projections described
above, the energy prices are calculated
so as to be in balance with an efficient
path of the technology mix into the
future, and thereby to induce the right
amount of energy saving. In particular if, as
projected by MRG, real prices of primary
energy rise in this path, then energy use is
projected to grow less than proportionally
to GNP.

The contrary doctrine-that regardless of
prices there is a persistent relationship between
energy use and GNP-has frequently
been expressed in the engineering literature.
In line with this observation, the MRG finding
of a possible small impact on GNP of
incisive bounds on specific energy technologies
led to lively correspondence and
discussions with members of CONA ES, and
of its Supply/Delivery Panel, an engineering-
oriented group. I should add that the
MRG study was not the first modeling study
to cast doubt on the doctrine referred to.
By my knowledge the first was a study by
Edward Hudson and Dale Jorgenson.
IV. Discounting Future Benefits and Costs
We are now ready for a closer look at the
discounting of future benefits and costs.
This practice reflects a simple technological
fact combined with the paradigm of equilibrium
over time. The simple fact is thatshort
of capital saturation-society can
temporarily curtail the production of current
consumption goods by transferring
some factors of production to the formation
of additional suitable capital goods,
in such a way as to return a multiple (> 1) of
the same unit bundle of consumption goods
in the future. Efficient intertemporal equilibrium
then demands that the present
value of the goods returned to consumption
be equal to that of the goods not now
consumed. The quantity of the future
bundle being larger, its per-unit present
value must be correspondingly lower. In a
projection that gives to one unit of the future
bundle a future real market price numerically
equal to its current price, a discount
factor d < 1 must be applied to the
future market price to obtain the present
value, per unit of the future bundle. Given
competitive markets for capital, present
goods and future goods, and ignoring differences
in risk, different investments bearing