about 1750 in England and up to a century later
in the rest of Europe. As I have noted, the share
of cities in Europe's population had remained
nearly constant for the previous five centuries,
and that this meant that the available food supply
had not increased significantly faster than
population and, equally important, that the productivity
of labor in agriculture also had not
increased enough to permit labor to transfer out
of agriculture and migrate to cities. The midpoint
of the eighteenth century marks a striking
dividing point in the demographic and agricultural
history of England. In the century up to
1750 England's population was static. It actually
declined in some periods and increased at
an annual rate of only 0.1 percent or by 10
percent in the entire century (E. A. Wrigley and
R. S. Schofield, 1981 pp. 528-29). Life expectancy
may have actually declined. But between
1751 and 1801 its population grew at an annual
rate of 0.81 percent and the total increased by
50 percent. In the next half century the population
nearly doubled. Nearly all of the increase in
the United Kingdom's population in the nineteenth
century was urban (Bairoch, 1988
p. 290).4
What increased productivity in agriculture so
strikingly after 1750? Exact causes are unknown,
but many changes were involved, including
the spread of two high-yielding crops
from the Americas-corn (maize) and potatoes,
the enclosure movement, the elimination of fallow,
improved drainage, and increased availability
of animal manure made possible by the
cultivation of turnips as feed for cattle (David S.
Landes, 1969 p. 76). There was a major increase
in England and the Netherlands in the grain-toseed
ratio to more than ten in 1750-1820 compared
to seven in the two centuries prior to 1700
(B. H. Slicher van Bath, 1963).5 Such a large
increase in yield was almost certainly associated
with a significant increase in labor productivity.
While urbanization increased very little in England
during the last half of the eighteenth century,
there was a significant expansion of
industrial activity in rural areas, especially in
the production of textiles.
Significant increases in per capita food production
and in labor productivity in agriculture
were necessary conditions for the Industrial
Revolution which was associated with, and may
well have been advanced by, rapid population
growth. The increase in food production was
necessary to sustain the rapid population
growth; the growth in agricultural labor productivity
was required to permit a reduction in the
share of labor devoted to farming and to permit
the transfer of labor to the cities. I do not argue
that the improvements in food supply and labor
productivity were sufficient conditions for the
Industrial Revolution. It is quite probable that
the agricultural and industrial revolutions had
the same sources and each was affected by
developments in the other.
IV. The Mechanical Revolution
The improvements in labor productivity in
agriculture occurring in the eighteenth century
and the early years of the nineteenth century
were insignificant compared to the changes that
occurred in the rest of the century. Throughout
history for most of the world's population the
4During the nineteenth century the United Kingdom was
transformed from a rural to an urban economy. In 1800 it
was 19.4 percent urban and in 1900, 67.6 urban. The population
increased from 16 million in 1800 to 41 million in
1900, an increase of 25 million, while the urban population
increased by 24 million. Continental Europe was only 32.9
percent urban in 1900 (Bairoch, 1988 p. 290).
5 It is not clear whether the increase in food production
in Western Europe in the eighteenth century after 1725 was
due primarily to productivity improvements or to a lengthy
period of good weather. Ronald Maxwell Hartwell (1971 p.
283) speculates that good weather might have been a sig-  nificant factor:
An important, neglected and completely exogenous
factor (perhaps the only one that is really exogenous)
, affecting eighteenth-century growth was the
beginning after 1730 of more than two centuries of
"good" weather (relative to the "bad" weather of the
previous more than two centuries). The coincidence  in time of the beginnings of the industrial revolution
and a long period of good weather suggests the
possibility of a theory of weather-induced growth:  better weather enabling an increase in food supplies,
increasing real incomes, and also an increasing pop-  ulation.
The weather, through its effects on food production, could
have been a factor in the slow growth of England's population
of 0.13 percent annually from 1621 to 1721 compared
to the much more rapid annual growth rate of 0.77 percent
in the following century (Wrigley and Schofield, 1981 pp.
528-29).