events, at least in recent years. The
Vietnam War, two massive oil shocks, the
introduction of floating exchange rates, and
the institution of a new monetary regime in
the United States in 1979 have dominated
events. Even if the vast majority of firms
held a broadly similar view of the way the
economic world works, the very great macroeconomic
uncertainty and the stochastic
variance of prior forecasts around the actual
outcomes would guarantee a wide dispersion
of individual forecasts whenever large shocks
occurred.

A wide dispersion of the forecasts of individual
economic agents and the experience of
errors in prior forecasts would have a
number of consequences. In the first place,
given the large room for disagreements about
the forecast, we have to rule out on moral
hazard grounds implicit contracts under
which workers, prior to actually observing
a deterioration in employment conditions,
would accept employer forecasts of a declining
equilibrium nominal wage as the basis
for a downward wage adjustment. But even
waiving this difficulty, the large dispersion of
individual forecasts would result in widespread
unintended relative wage changes,
even if all firms and their workers accepted a
wage adjustment based on the firm's equilibrium
forecasts. Because of both risk aversion
and the consequences to firms and
workers that follow from erroneous signals,
these changes could impose significant losses
on the parties. Yet, a high frequency of wage
changes is also costly, so that errors would
tend to persist for some time. Indeed, given
the incompleteness and imperfections of
current information, and the murkiness of
the variable being forecast-the equilibrium
nominal wage level-there would be substantial
room for disagreement among the
parties as to whether or not a prior forecast
had or had not been in error. Finally, to the
extent that "bad" experience with forecasts
caused some firms and workers to reduce the
forward-looking element in wage setting, the
unreliability of forecasts for those who used
them would become greater. It would become
increasingly less rational to base individual
wage decisions on the assumption that
others were forecasting the equilibrium
adjustment and promptly adjusting wages
accordingly. Thus, without the "policing"
mechanism of relative wage flexibility, a system
that relied on rational expectations forecasts
of the equilibrium wage outcome would
be unstable.

In sum, under implicit contracts, widespread
tying of individual wage decisions to
expectations about equilibrium aggregate
wage outcomes is not a feasible way of anticipating
the optimal adjustment to nominal
shocks. The policing mechanism of ex ante
relative wage flexibility is absent, so that
nominal wage flexibility becomes a prisoner's
dilemma problem. And prompt rational
expectations "indexing" to the equilibrium
outcome is no solution to that problem, since
it would increase haggling costs, produce
unwanted relative wage changes, and become
increasingly an irrational action on the part
of individual firms.

In the absence of widespread indexing
to some nominal aggregate, or to the rational
expectation of the equilibrium wage norm
W, wages must find their way to a lower level
as the product of specific decisions among
individual firms and their workers, in a process
constrained by the same social conventions
and informal agreements that dictate
the change in relative wages under implicit
contracts. In a world of price and wage
setters, firms and workers observe demand
shocks principally in the form of changes in
their own physical quantities- sales first and
then output and employment-and in the
context, initially, of an unchanged perceived
level of W. The dynamics of the process by
which firms adjust from one level of the
work force to another can, as described by
Okun and by George Perry (1980), generate
modest wage changes in response to the aggregate
shocks. Beyond this, the change in
external pressures for wage adjustment must
be large enough and last long enough to
satisfy the constraints imposed by long-term
implicit contracts on "permanent" wage
changes. Finally, to the extent that these
changes become substantial and widespread,
enough to yield a long-term change in the
perceived level of W, the whole nominal