to pay attention to costs, and physicians will
also be interested in making a good income,
but there is a vast difference between a profitmaximizing
corporation and physicians who
strive to balance their obligations to patients,
the organization, and themselves.46
Reimbursement of these integrated systems
should be primarily by capitation, adjusted
for patient characteristics. In addition, patients
should be required to make modest copayments
at the time of use (e.g., $15 for each
visit and $5 for each prescription). Such payments
will generate some income but, more
important, will help to discourage wasteful use
of health care. The payments could be waived
for patients living below the poverty level,
and for essential preventive services such as
vaccination.
The earmarked tax would provide every
American with a voucher for a basic health
care plan. Each integrated system would be
required to offer the basic plan, plus a variety
of options. These options are not alternative
insurance plans; they are services to be paid
for at time of use with after-tax dollars.47 The
options could take many forms: a private room
in the hospital; a wider choice of physicians
and hospitals than is available through the basic
plan; or access to new experimental technologies
or older technologies not included in
the basic plan because they have a low benefitto-
cost ratio.48
These options would accommodate the demands
of patients with higher incomes or
those who choose to spend more of their income
on medical care. The options would not
constitute establishment of different plans. Everyone
would be in the same plan and most
persons would stick to the basic plan most of
the time. An option would be exercised only
when the patient desired and was willing to
pay for it. This is the quintessential American
approach to balancing equality and freedom.
On the one hand, this approach avoids the
egalitarianism of the English and Canadian
systems in which only a small elite have an
escape valve. On the other hand, it does not
create a separate plan for the poor while the
great majority of Americans obtain care from
a different system. The experience with Medicaid
shows that a separate system limited to
the poor is not likely to function well.
Where feasible, the integrated health care
system would engage in managed competition.
49 Having advocated policies similar to
such an approach to health care for more than
20 years (Fuchs, 1974a), I am not unmindful
of its virtues. We cannot, however, rely on
managed competition alone to contain costs.
In most rural areas, population density is too
low to support several health care systems.
Even in some urban areas, competition is impossible
or undesirable because of economies
of scale. For instance, only one hospital is
needed to serve a population of 100,000 efficiently.
Similar constraints apply to competition
in physician specialty care, especially if
the physicians work full time at their specialties.
A population of 1 million would probably
not justify enough independent maternity services
or open-heart surgery teams to create
competitive conditions. Moreover, the public
interest is not best served by insisting that
health professionals always maintain rigorous
arm' s-length competition with one another.
Patients can benefit from cooperation among
physicians and hospitals, both in reduced costs
and better service. Managed competition alone
will not be enough to contain costs; it must be