(1964). The NBER conference volume in-
cluded Selma Mushkin's (1962) paper,
"Health As an Investment," and a few years
later the application of the human capital
model to health was given its fullest develop-
ment by Michael Grossman (1972).
Predating and postdating the theoretical and
econometric innovations of the 1960's is a
stream of research that focuses on health care
institutions, technology, and policy. As early
as 1932, Michael M. Davis and C. Rufus
Rorem (1932) were writing about the crisis in
hospital finance. Significant contributions to
this genre have been made by Henry Aaron,
Alain Enthoven, Rashi Fein, Eli Ginzberg,
Herbert Klarman, Dorothy Rice, Anne Scitovsky,
Anne and Herman Somers, Burton Weisbrod,
and many others. Although they are all econ-
omists, much of their work does not appear in
economics journals, but rather in books and in
publications such as the New England Journal
of Medicine, Journal of the American Medical
Association, Milbank Memorial Fund Quar-
terly, and Health Affairs.
In recent decades several leading health
economists have addressed theoretical, empir-
ical, and policy questions in various aspects of
their research (e.g., Joseph Newhouse, Mark
Pauly). Health economics has also been enliv-
ened and enriched by contributions from econ-
omists who are primarily specialists in other
fields such as industrial organization, labor, fi-
nance, and public economics (e.g., Sherwin
Rosen, Richard Zeckhauser). There has also
been a welcome infusion from another direc-
tion, namely physicians who have earned
Ph.D.s in economics and who now contribute
to the economics literature (e.g., Alan Garber,
Mark McClellan).
Parenthetically, all this name-dropping has
a point. I want to underscore the varied intellec-
tual, methodological, and ideological sources
that have contributed to the health economics
enterprise. Research has often been described
as lonely work, and in one sense it is. But in
another sense it is the most collective of all
human activities. The philosopher Susan Haack
(1995) sees scientific research as analogous to
an attempt by many participants to fill out a
huge crossword puzzle. We have clues; we try
out possible answers; we check to see whether
they fit together. Occasionally, an Arrow or a
Becker comes up with one of the really big
answers that runs across the puzzle and makes
it easier to discover the smaller words that in-
tersect it. If several of the small answers don't
fit, however, we may have to modify or even
reject the larger one. It is good to remember
that all answers are provisional until the puzzle
is completed-and it never will be.5
Although I have mentioned only American
economists, note should be taken of many fine
health economists in England, Canada, and
other high-income countries. There is, how-
ever, less of a global intellectual community
in this field than in some other branches of
economics'-or in other fields of health7-
because most health economics research is
applied and is (or is perceived to be) coun-
try specific. More than 60 years ago Walton
Hamilton (1932) noted that "The organiza-
tion of medicine is not a thing apart which can
be subjected to study in isolation. It is an
aspect of culture whose arrangements are
inseparable from the general organization of
society" (p. 190). On the whole I agree
with Hamilton; there are, however, important
economic questions concerning technology
assessment and disease prevention that are
common to all high-income countries. This
type of research does not receive support com-
mensurate with its importance because fund-
ing sources, both public and private, tend to
focus on national problems.
My involvement in health economics grew
out of my research on the service industries
(Fuchs, 1968, 1969). It was motivated in part
by a desire to gain a better understanding of
the postindustrial society that was emerging in
the United States and other developed coun-