the ongoing inflation. Without exception, in
my own observations, the higher the rate of
inflation, the worse is its effect in blurring
agents' perceptions of relative prices. In an
inflation at, say, 20 percent to 50 percent per
year, people see prices as in a morning haze;
in one of 20 percent to 50 percent per month,
they see them as in a London fog. Many empirical
studies exist showing that serious inflations
are seriously inimical to growth. (See
William Easterly, 1996.) The clouding of
perceptions of relative prices is an important
reason why-for it gets in the way of successful
real cost reductions at the level of the
individual firm.
Inflation also inhibits growth in other, perhaps
more obvious ways:
(i) by diverting energies from more productive
activities to the search for mechanisms
of inflation protection;
(ii) by reducing (often very drastically) people'
s real monetary balances, thus impacting
negatively on the real amount of
credit the banking system provides to the
productive sector; and
(iii) somewhat related to both (a) and (b),
by causing people (both "here"' and
abroad) to invest abroad some of the
funds they would otherwise have invested
"here," or (what is very close
to the same thing) by accumulating
hoards of hard currencies as an inflation
hedge.
(b) A second policy implication is, in the
words of my friend and longtime collaborator
Ernesto Fontaine, avoid "prices that lie"
(precios mentirosos). Talking about inflation,
we focus on the blurring of the signals
that the price system gives; here we focus on
its giving wrong signals due to distortions
that have been introduced, usually as a direct
consequence of government policies. No
good can or did come, in terms of economic
efficiency, from tariffs of 50 percent and 100
percent and more, giving effective protection
often of 200 percent and 300 percent
and more. Nor can growth be fostered by
heavy-handed price controls and interventions
in credit markets.
I am not being a religious purist here-just
as big distortions have big costs, small distortions
typically have small costs, and all economies
are distorted to some degree. The
message here is that economies have to pay
the price for the level of distortions they
choose to have, and that one of the important
components of that price is that distortions
create situations where what is truly a saving
of private costs is not a genuine saving of costs
from the point of view of the economy as a
whole.
(c) Just as bad, and often even worse than
direct distortions, are the excess costs imposed
on an economy by ill-conceived regulations
and bureaucratic hurdles. Hermando DeSoto
(1989) has made the exposure of these trammels
in Peru into what has become virtually
his life's work. Clear rules of the game are
an essential and integral part of a wellfunctioning
market economy, but all too easily
these get supplemented by others that make
investment, production, marketing, sales, new
product development, etc., more costly. Labor
laws have been particularly troublesome, often
adding artificially to the cost of labor and giving
firms a strong incentive to avoid hiring
new workers, simply because of the high costs
associated with any later dismissal of them.
But there are loads of other items-the need
for approvals, sometimes a dozen or more,
before undertaking some investment or some
new venture; regulations that one way or another
impede new entry, so as to protect strong
vested interests ( small retailers being protected
against supermarkets in many countries)
; and the complexity of tax codes and
their enforcement, which imposes large compliance
costs on business firms and individuals.
Somehow, countries interested in
promoting growth should find ways of paring
their regulatory frameworks down to those
rules and requirements that are really justifiable
in terms of their costs and benefits to the
economy and society at large.
(d) Although international trade distortions
(tariffs, quotas, licenses, prohibitions,
etc.) might be subsumed under points (b) and
(c), their importance merits a separate heading.
The move to openness (from a protectionism
that sometimes bordered on autarchy)
has been one of the main hallmarks of the
growth miracles of the past half-century [see