People today have more adequate nutrition
than ever before and acquire that nutrition at the
lowest cost in all human history, while the
world has more people than ever before-not by
a little but by a lot. This is an achievement that
many have argued could not be realized.
Throughout history there have been those who
believed that food shortages and famine were
the fate of humanity and that the world's population
was restricted not by human decisions
on fertility but by limitations imposed by nature.
Unfortunately for nearly all of human history
and for the vast majority of the world's
people, this pessimism was justified. In the last
two centuries, and especially in the twentieth
century, all has changed to a remarkable degree.
The twentieth century can be remembered as the
century in which hunger could have been eliminated
and, to a significant extent, has been.
I. Food and Population Growth
Thomas Robert Malthus, publishing the first
edition of his famous An Essay on the Principles
of Population in 1798, is usually credited
with the pessimistic view that population had a
tendency to outrun the available food supply
and was held in check by vice and misery--war,
disease, or starvation-but he was not the originator
of the idea. At least two millennia earlier
it was written in the Bible: "When goods increase,
those who eat them increase." (Ecclesiastes
5.)
Quintus Septimus Florence Tertillianus wrote:
Indeed it is certain, it is clear to see, that
the earth itself is currently more cultivated
and developed than in earlier times.
Now all places are accessible, all are docurnented,
all are full of business. The
most charming farms obliterate empty
places, ploughed fields vanquish forests,
herds drive out wild beasts, sandy places
are planted with crops, stones are fixed,
swamps drained, and there are such great
cities where formerly hardly a hut ... everywhere
there is a dwelling, everywhere
a multitude, everywhere a government,
everywhere there is life. The greatest evidence
of the large number of people: we
are burdensome to the world, the resources
are scarcely adequate to us; and
our needs straiten us and complaints are
everywhere while already nature does not
sustain us. Truly, pestilence and hunger
and war and flood must be consider as a
remedy for nations, like a pruning back of
the human race becoming excessive in
numbers. (Bart K. Holland, 1993 pp.
328-29.)
This was written about 200 A.D. when the
world's population was approximately 200 million.
Note that the quotation includes nearly all
the modern complaints about the effects of excessive
population on the environment-deforestation,
loss of biological diversity, farming
unsuitable land, drainage of the natural refuges
for wildlife-as well as the massing of people in
cities.
While Malthus was neither the first, nor the
last, to claim population growth carried with it
the seeds of disaster for humanity, he may have
been the first to significantly modify his view
that population growth would inevitably press
against the food supply. Five years after the
gloomy first edition, in the second edition of An
Essay on the Principles of Population he significantly
modified his major conclusion. After
noting the recent growth of European population,
he wrote:
.. fewer famines and fewer diseases arising
from want have prevailed in the last
century than in those that preceded it. On
the whole, therefore, though our future
prospects respecting the mitigation of the