THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
Despite the advantages of annuities, we see
only a small fraction of people doing voluntary
annuitization.14 Furthermore, those who do annuitize
make very odd choices. They buy nominal
annuities. There is wide popularity of what
are called guarantees-continued payments after
death up to some limit.15 Such guarantees
undo some of the underlying annuitization, and
are a relatively expensive form of holding nonannuitized
wealth (given the relative administrative
costs on annuities and other accounts).
They represent an increase in the riskiness of
one's bequest, not a decrease. That is, an annuity
without a guarantee costs less, allowing one
to leave one's heirs a determinate amount in
present value, rather than a random amount
depending on the date of death.'6 More generally,
many features of insurance markets are
hard to reconcile with sensible decisions by
households and the equilibrium industry response
we would expect in the presence of
sensible demands. The extremely limited options
available for annuitization seem to reflect
the natural response of the supply of insurance  to the nature of demand.17
Some have tried to explain this limited use of
annuities by the degree of annuitization that
already exists in government programs. But voluntary
annuitization, while present for centuries
before the creation of these programs, was not
extensive in the population and is unlikely to
become extensive if the programs were removed.
Asymmetric information is another candidate
for explaining this situation, and it does
cause an adverse selection effect on pricing that
14 There is a thriving market in what are called variable  annuities, but these are tax-favored investment vehicles
with a bit of insurance included (to get the favorable tax  treatment) and an option to purchase a genuine annuity, an  option that appears to be rarely taken. With the recent  addition of a lump-sum option in many defined benefit  plans, many workers may be forgoing an annuity, although  it is difficult to tell since some may simply be waiting to
annuitize later.
15 Among TIAA-CREF annuitants roughly three-  quarters choose some guarantee period (John Ameriks,
2002).
16 Guarantees may play a role in addressing adverse  selection, but that is, itself, a reflection of poor functioning
in this market relative to ideals.
17 Although markets provide both term life insurance  and whole-life contracts, the only annuities in the market are  for payments over the rest of one's life, from the date of the  first payment.  would discourage some individuals from annuitizing.
While large systematic differences in
life expectancy do exist, much of the difference
is readily attributed to easily measured factors,
so insurance companies could do more to overcome
this problem, given the potential for large
gains to the insured.18 In the United Kingdom,
there is a sizable market for individual purchase
of annuities because of a large tax incentive for
their purchase from assets in tax-favored individual
retirement accounts. In the presence of
this demand, suppliers are offering annuities
with better prices for those with "impaired
lives." We do not see this risk classification in
the United States, presumably because there is
not a ready market in which firms could take
advantage of selection by risk classification and
better pricing since so few households purchase
annuities on an individual (nongroup) basis. So,
adverse selection alone can not explain the low
level of annuitization that is present.'9
I believe the major issue behind this pattern
of insurance demand is the failure of many to
understand the advantages of annuitization.
This plausibly relates to the failure of much of
the population to understand the properties of
stochastic variables, as has been documented by
cognitive psychologists. It is to be expected that
the set of insurance products that are marketed
will reflect the shortcomings of consumer
understanding-it is very expensive to try to
sell a product the virtues of which potential
customers do not understand. I think that without
Social Security, inadequate annuitization
would be even more widespread than inadequate
savings.
In any event, social security systems in advanced
countries typically provide benefits as
annuities, annuities that are generally indexed to
prices or wages (or a combination). This is a
simple application of the view that in a mandatory
program, individuals should be given what
we think they would want if they were well-
18 Antidiscrimination rules do limit the variables that
insurance companies can recognize in pricing. But more  could readily be done with allowable categories, such as  smoking, type of job, earnings level. The adaptations of the  life insurance market to the presence of adverse selection  are suggestive that adaptations would occur if the market for  annuities were of a comparable size to that for life insurance.
19 Note that there is considerable risk classification for
life insurance.
6
MARCH 2004