ity, which can be treated as a primitive
concept, with an unspecified interpretation,
in an axiomatic economic theory. A newly
discovered interpretation can then increase
considerably the range of applicability of
the theory without requiring any change in
its structure. Thus, by making the transfer
of a good or service between two agents
contingent on the state of the world that
will obtain, Arrow (1953) made possible the
immediate extension of the economic theory
of certainty to an economic theory of uncertainty
by a simple reinterpretation of the
concept of a commodity. The theory of financial
markets has been influenced by that
view of uncertainty, and their practice has
not been unaffected. Finally, take the problem
of existence of a general equilibrium,
once considered to be one of the most abstract
questions of economic theory. The
solutions that were proposed in the early
1950's paved the way for the algorithms for
the computation of equilibria of Herbert E.
Scarf (1973) and for several of the developments
of applied general equilibrium analysis
(Scarf and John B. Shoven, 1984). In this
case, abstraction in economic theory led to
the study of fundamental problems of great
generality, but also to a broad range of
applications.
III
The list of advances that the mathematization
of economic theory helped or permitted
is already long; and in one aspect it may
appear lengthy. Ceteris paribus, one cannot
prefer less to more rigor, lesser to greater
generality, or complexity to simplicity; but
other things are not equal, and in the estimate
of many members of our Association
the cost of that mathematization sometimes
outweighs its benefit. Two of its presidential
addresses notably confronted that difficult
analysis and stressed the price that economics
paid for its increased use of mathematics.
Wassily Leontief's (1971) observations
were factual, and Robert A. Gordon's
(1976) comments relevant when they were
made in 1970 and in 1975. They still are
today, for, in spite of their authorities, enhanced
by the platform from which they
were speaking, and in spite of the wide
diffusion of their critiques, neither Leontief
nor Gordon altered the course of the development
they were assessing. In the past two
decades, economic theory has been carried
away further by a seemingly irresistible current
that can be explained only partly by the
intellectual successes of its mathematization.

Essential to an attempt at a fuller explanation
are the values imprinted on an
economist by his study of mathematics.
When a theorist who has been so typed
judges his scholarly work, those values do
not play a silent role; they may play a decisive
role. The very choice of the questions
to which he tries to find answers is influenced
by his mathematical background.
Thus, the danger is ever present that the
part of economics will become secondary, if
not marginal, in that judgment.
The reward system of our profession reinforces
the effects of that autocriticism. Decisions
that shape the career of an economic
theorist are made by his peers. Whether
they are referees of a journal or of a research
organization, members of an appointment
or of a promotion committee,
when they sit as judges in any capacity, their
verdicts will not be independent of their
own values. An economist who appears in
their court rarely ignores his perception of
those values. If he believes that they rate
mathematical sophistication highly, and if
he can prove that he is one of the sophisticates,
the applause that he expects to receive
will condition his performance.
The same effects are also amplified by the
relentless pressure to publish exerted by his
environment. There are indeed instances of
extreme restraint in scientific publication,
and some of them have become legend. The
mathematical papers of Bernhard Riemann
(1826-1866) take 506 pages in the volume
that collected them (Riemann, 1876). The
molecular structure of DNA was announced
by James Watson and Francis Crick (1953)
in a one-page article. But it is easier to
explain those examples away than to follow
them. The environment of a scholar demands
papers, and the temptation to supply
them without restraint may become over-