years or less-is two orders of magnitude
smaller, around 0.3 percent. Most of the high
return on equity is estimated to be compensation
for long-term risk only, risk that could not be
much reduced by short-run policies that are
neutral in the long run.
Accepting Shapiro and Watson's finding that
less that 30 percent of output variance at
business-cycle frequencies can be attributed to
nominal shocks, the lower Alvarez and Jermann
estimate of 0.3 should be reduced to 0.1 if it is
to serve my purpose as an estimate of the value
of potential improvements in stabilization policy.
But it is important to keep in mind that this
estimate is not smaller than Tallarini's because
of a different estimate of risk aversion. Tallarini's
estimate of y - 100 is the parametric analogue
of Alvarez and Jermann's "market price of
risk," based on exactly the same resolution of
the equity premium puzzle. The different cost
estimate is entirely due to differences in the
consumption paths being compared.
Resolving empirical difficulties by adding
new parameters always works, but often only by
raising more problems. The risk-aversion levels
needed to match the equity premium, under the
assumption that asset markets are complete,
ought to show up somewhere besides securities
prices, but they do not seem to do so. No one
has found risk-aversion parameters of 50 or 100
in the diversification of individual portfolios, in
the level of insurance deductibles, in the wage
premiums associated with occupations with
high earnings risk, or in the revenues raised by
state-operated lotteries. It would be good to
have the equity premium resolved, but I think
we need to look beyond high estimates of risk
aversion to do it. The great contribution of
Alvarez and Jermann is to show that even using
the highest available estimate of risk aversion,
the gain from further reductions in businesscycle
risk is below one-tenth of 1 percent of
consumption. The evidence also leaves one free
to believe-as I do-that the gain is in fact one
or two orders of magnitude smaller.
V. Incomplete Markets and Distribution Effects
The calculations I have described so far treat
households as identical and individual risks as
diversifiable. But as Per Krusell and Anthony A.
Smith, Jr. (1999) observe, "it is quite plausible  that the welfare costs of cycles are not so high
on average, but may be very high for, say, the
very poor or currently unemployed members of
society." Several recent studies have pursued
this possibility.16 Doing so evidently requires
models with incomplete risk sharing and differently
situated agents.
Krusell and Smith (1999, 2002) study a
model economy in which individual families
are subject to three kinds of stochastic shocks.
There is an aggregate productivity shock that
affects everyone, and employment shocks that
differ from person to person. Families are infinitely
lived dynasties, but every 40 years or so
a family draws a new head, whose subjective
discount rate is drawn from a fixed distribution.
Dynasties with patient heads will accumulate
wealth while others will run their wealth
down.17 The sizes of these shocks are chosen so
that the model economy experiences realistic
GDP fluctuations, unemployment spells have
realistic properties, and the overall wealth distribution
matches the U.S. distribution: In the
model, the wealthiest 5 percent of households
own 54 percent of total wealth; in reality, they
hold 51 percent.
It is essential to the substantive question that
motivates this study that neither the employment
shocks nor the uncertainty about the character
of the household head can be diversified
away. Otherwise, the individual effects of the
aggregate productivity shocks would be the
same as in the representative agent models I
have already discussed. One may argue over
why it is that markets do not permit such diversification,
but it seems clear enough that they do
not: Where is the market where people can be
insured against the risk of having irresponsible
or incompetent parents or children?
These exogenous forces acting differentially
across households induce different individual
choices, which in turn lead to differences in
individual capital holdings. The state space in
this economy is very large, much larger than