people's views as to how they should behave
will enter their utility function. In each case, we
shall see that such views will nullify the respective
neutrality result. Indeed, we shall also see
that in each case there will be a natural norm
broadly consistent with Keynesians' views of
economic behavior.21

IV. Ricardian Equivalence
We shall begin our detailed discussion with
Ricardian equivalence. It was chronologically
the last of the neutralities to be appreciated by
modern economists. But it is also the simplest.
That makes it the best place to begin.22 If there
is missing motivation in the utility function, it
should be easiest to see here.
A very simple model demonstrates the essence
of Ricardian equivalence, as it was rediscovered
by Robert Barro after a lapse of almost
two centuries.23 In the model, there are just two
periods, periods 1 and 2. There are just two
people, a parent and her child. The utility of the
parent depends directly upon her own consumption,
in period 1; it also depends upon the utility
of her child. That utility depends upon his consumption,
in period 2.

The parent's utility function can be expressed
simply as U,(cl, U2(c2)), where c1 is the consumption
of the parent, C2 is the consumption of
the child, U, is the utility of the parent, and U2
is the utility of the child. The parent chooses her
consumption in period 1 to maximize her utility.
Whatever wealth remains, she bequeaths to her
child.

Ricardian equivalence takes the following form
in this model. Suppose that the government
gives a transfer, which we shall call a social
security payment, to the parent in period 1; but
then in period 2 it taxes the child to retire the
debt caused by this transfer.24 In this case, the
consumption of a parent who maximizes the
utility function U, and who leaves a bequest to
her child will be unaffected by her receipt of
social security.

The logic of this result is simple. With and
without social security the discounted value of
consumption of the parent and of the child is
constrained by the discounted value of the family'
s earnings (plus its initial wealth). Social
security leaves that constraint unchanged. If the
parent found (c,, c2) to be the optimal division
of consumption between herself and her child in
the absence of a social security payment, this
same division of consumption between herself
and her child will optimize her utility with a
social security payment.

A vast literature explains why such Ricardian
equivalence is unlikely to be empirically descriptive.
25 The long list of reasons includes (a)
infinite, rather than finite, horizons; (b) strategic
bequests to obtain the attention of one's heirs
while alive; (c) childless families; (d) uncertainty,
including bequests made because of uncertainty
about the age of death; (e) differential
borrowing rates between the government and
the public; (f) growth of the economy in excess
of the interest rate, allowing steady debt issuance;
(g) lack of foresight regarding the effect
of social security on future taxes; (h) foreign
ownership of debt; (i) tax distortions;26, 27, 28 (j)