However, this very simple world has a
central bank, or its ruler has a printing press.
When bank loans or printing press money
are used to finance a public purpose (such as
an increment in the Prince's consumption)
goods prices are bid up. However, each yeoman
farmer or craftsman is likely to confuse
the rise in his own selling price as a rise in
his price relative to prices for the products
and services of other yeomen. Such relative
price changes occur for various reasons, and
are familiar to each of them. Each therefore
works harder in the presence of inflation,
and produces more, so as to permit him to
consume more of the output of his fellow
farmers or craftsmen, whose prices he presumes
not to have risen. Of course, the Prince
has already consumed more of their output,
too; and their prices, too, have risen, But
until each yeoman discovers that the rise in
his price is general rather than relative, real
GNP increases. Soon, however, each learns
that there has been no increase in his real
price, and finds only the sour taste of inflation.
The boom ends. It can be repeated as
soon as the short memories of all citizens are
erased. 14
What can this have to do with the business
cycle in a world in which yeoman farmers
and craftsmen are replaced by firms with
hired employees? Very little, I think. For, in
even the simplest possible version of this
more familiar world, there have to be two
kinds of prices, not one: prices for goods,
and prices for labor. Increased production
now requires increased inputs not only from
proprietors, but also from their workers. Under
standard price theory, in order for
employers to wish to hire more labor services,
they must believe that product prices have
risen relative to wages; but in order for existing
workers to respond to inflation by
working longer hours, and other potential
workers to enter the labor force, requires
that they interpret what happens as a rise in
the ratio of wages to prices. It was a nice
enough trick to be able to fool each yeoman
about his own real price; but it is an even
nicer trick for an inflation to fool both employers
and workers- in opposite directions
-about the movement of the real wage
paid by one and received by the other!'5
I suggest that more may be learned about
cycles from Knut Wicksell's discussion of
business fluctuations, seventy-five years earlier.
Wicksell understood that, even in a similarly
simple world, there needed to be not
merely one kind of price level-nor merely
two kinds-but actually three: price levels
for goods, for labor, and for loans. And
whether or not there was a Prince with a
printing press, there were competitive banks,
aggressively lending at a flexible price to
businesses. Given a plausible (although incompletely
specified) lag structure, Wicksell
showed that banks' competition in money
creation might initially reduce the price for
loans; and their continuing money creation
might keep it depressed for a time. Through
this means, investment, financed by bank
credit, could exceed ex ante saving, crowding
out consumption. The result, of course, was
also inflation, unanticipated by all. Once the
limits of money creation were reached, the
boom collapsed.
At roughly the same time, in another part
of Europe, J. A. Schumpeter was describing
a rather different source of instability. His
bourgeois prince- the innovating entrepreneur-
driven by new technological, managerial,
or marketing ideas that promised
abnormal profits, repeatedly upset the general
equilibrium: accommodated, of course,
by an elastic banking system. To be sure, his
entrepreneurial activities-his "creative destruction"
-would soon generate an inflation
that had to subside before the next
wave of innovation might again disturb the
economy.
'41n another version (Lucas, 1975), there are genuine
firms selling products and purchasing labor and capital
inputs; but production is scattered among noncommunicating
islands, using capital that is immobile and
labor that is randomly mobile (between periods), while
increments of money are distributed stochastically
among the separated markets from period to period.
This schema permits changes in money to create fluctuations
of real output (of capital goods); but it is not at all
clear (to me) why or how the postulated source of such
"cycles" bears any relationship to the cycles of the "real
world."