The required simplifying assumptions
are reasonably well satisfied in the macroeconomic
Cobb-Douglas framework. The
CES model also acquires the needed properties
if we work into it a mechanism of
induced invention and of distributiveshares
equilibrium.8 This is explained in
Appendix A. In Sections III and IV we
shall return to the question how much
similarity of the real world with such
models is implied in my paper.
I should add that on both sides of my
benefit-cost ledger I will have to disregard
problems of considerable importance which
either cannot be articulated sufficiently
well, or, if capable of articulation, can
be appraised only in very vague terms. I
will not be able to consider the question
whether all-too-rapid change does not reduce
our well-being "in a fundamental
sense," or, on the other hand, whether at a
stagnant or near-stagnant level of technology
the institutions of Western nations
would be workable at all. Nor will I try to
explore the relationship of technological
progress to population growth and to its
specific consequences.
II. Two Versions of the Social BenefitCost
Ratio, and their Meaning
A substantial part of the progress-generating
costs of each period is incurred by
decision makers subjected to the criterion
of private economic yield. The progresscosts
falling in this category consist mainly
of the costs of privately financed research
and development (R & D) and of the extra
costs of changing over to new industrial
processes. Though we are concerned here
with the problem of social yield, we should
obviously include these private yield-oriented
costs in the cost-base of our benefitcost
ratio.
Another large part of the progress-generating
expenses is incurred by agencies
not institutionally subjected to criteria of
economic yield. The government-financed
R & D9 and that financed by other nonprofit
institutions belong here, and so does
almost all of the cost of increased per
capita education.10 This does not mean
that the nonprofit institutions incurring
these costs are under no political or quasipolitical"
pressure to keep costs down per
unit of service; what it does mean is that
these costs create net income by definition,
i.e., that their net-income-creating property
does not depend on whether they
generate offsetting revenues. Nonprofit institutions,
most prominently illustrated by
governments, but illustrated also by private
teaching organizations, can have defcits
but these deficits are not usually
viewed as negative income such as would
cancel any part of the incomes created by
the institutions. In the language of national
accounting, the services of these institutions
are valued at cost, though, when
appraising the worth of the services, any
individual may find this valuation unconvincing.
In this regard such costs are
treated differently from those of firms,
e.g., differently from that R & D component
which is financed by industry.'2 The
8 See my December 1967 article which is listed in the
Reference section, as are the particulars of the other
references. The bibliography attached to that article
lists earlier writings of several authors on this subject
(including some by the present writer).
9 In the United States the greater part of the government-
financed R & D is performed on contract by industry.
The remainder of the government-financed component
is performed by the government itself and by
other nonprofit institutions (see Appendix D).  10 Training on the job in the business sector, and sales
of books, periodicals and newspapers to consumers
represent exceptions. These are institutionally profitoriented
expenditures. They do not weigh heavily in the
sum total of education costs in the broad sense (and, of
course, these items belong here only if education costs
are interpreted in the broad sense, as they should be for
our purpose).  11 By quasi-political pressure, I mean the pressure to
which trustees and administrators of private nonprofit
organizations are exposed and which they in turn exert
on the staffs of these organizations.
la Industry finances also some of the research performed
by universities and other nonprofit organiza-  tions but more than 98 percent of the R & D financed by
industry is also performed by it. (Continued)