200,000
150,000-
100,000 -
100 000 Total t\/\ ,>/ Domestic /
50,000I
Foreign _--
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980
FIGURE 5. PATENT APPLICATIONS IN THE UNITED STATES, 1880-1992
IV. Why Is the Glass Half-Empty?
Economists have not been very successful
in explaining what has happened to the
economy during the last two decades, nor
have they been able to agree on what should
be done about it. I will argue that data and
measurement difficulties may in fact be a
major source of this failure. This point will
be made not to provide us with an alibi, but
rather to temper the pretentiousness of
some of our pronouncements and to urge us
toward the more mundane task of observation
and measurement.
Why don't we know more after all these
years? Our data have always been less than
perfect. What is it about the recent situation
that has made matters worse?
The brief answer is that the economy has
changed and that our data-collection efforts
have not kept pace with it. "Real" national
income accounts were designed in an earlier
era, when the economy was simpler and had
a large agricultural sector and a growing
manufacturing sector. Even then, a number
of compromises had to be made to get measurement
off the ground. In large sectors of
the economy, such as construction and most
of the services, government, and other public
institutions, there were no real output
measures or relevant price deflators. Imagine
a "degrees of measurability" scale, with
wheat production at one end and lawyer
services at the other. One can draw a rough
dividing line on this scale between what I
shall call "reasonably measurable" sectors
and the rest, where the situation is not
much better today than it was at the beginning
of the national income accounts. Table
2 shows the distribution of nominal GDP by
major industrial sector. In the early postWorld
War II period, the situation was not
all that bad: about half of the overall economy
was "measurable" in this sense. By
1990, however, the fraction of the economy
for which the productivity numbers are half
reasonable had fallen to below one-third.
Figure 6 tells the same story with employment
numbers. Measurement problems have
indeed become worse. Our ability to interpret
changes in aggregate total factor productivity
has declined, and major portions
of actual technical change have eluded our
measurement framework entirely.15
15 1 An argument could be made that this story would
not be so bleak if we had focused on consumption
expenditures instead, since many of the offending inAn