luck in the technological draw, side by side
with highly diverse experience between indus-
tries because the distribution of technical ad-
vances had wide dispersion, even for periods
as long as a decade.
Getting access to data at the firm level per-
mits one to explore whether this view is com-
patible with the actual experiences of firms and
industries. We are just in the early stages of this
exploration, but I think the result is quite clear
already; namely, the "mushrooms" story pre-
vails just as much among firms within an in-
dustry as it does among industries within a
sector or broader aggregate. I will present here
only a taste of the evidence from the United
States (on which our systematic work just re-
cently got started). Our massive evidence
comes from the Mexican manufacturing sector,
for which Leonardo Torre ( 1997) has analyzed
data from a sample of over 2,000 firms. A small
fraction of these firms were lost owing to miss-
ing data, but some 1,900 firms remained in the
sample that Torre finally worked with. These
firms were divided into 44 branches of industry,
so that on average we have about 43 firms per
branch.
There are really too many ways to present
such a mass of information as is contained in
Torre's study. What I will do here is give the
aggregate picture in Figure 4, and then show
in Figures 5A-C three fast-growing branches,
three of around median growth, and three from
among the slowest-growing branches.
To complement these figures, I finally pres-
ent, in Figures 6A-D, certain summary statis-
tics from the sunrise-sunset diagrams of the 44
branches that Torre studied. Here Figure 6A
gives the distribution of average rates of TFP
growth among the 44 industries. Figure 6B
shows the distribution of peak cumulative con-
tributions, i.e., what the TFP contribution
would have been had all the negatives been
zeros. Figure 6C displays the percentile of
firms (by initial value added) marking the bor-
derline between positive and negative TFP
growth. And finally, Figure 6D shows, for
branches with positive TFP growth, the per-
centile of firms which, by themselves, account
for 100 percent of the industry's TFP growth.
This evidence almost seems to replicate, for
firms within an industry, what was found in
the previous section for industries within the