changing the entrenched views of the 1950's
and 1960's? Finally, what types of research
were most (and least) productive in bringing
about better understanding of the role of trade
and trade policy in development? I address
these questions in turn.
The first is the issue of how the principle of
comparative advantage could have been so
blithely abandoned. With hindsight, it is almost
incredible that such a high fraction of
economists could have deviated so far from
the basic principles of international trade.
What led them to do so? Can any lessons be
drawn to avoid (or shorten the duration of)
similar mistakes in other applied fields when
new policy problems arise?
But, recall the stylized facts that were
widely accepted. People were thought not to
respond to incentives; exports earnings were
thought to be predetermined and slowly growing
at best; industrialization was necessary for
development; supply response was lacking;
and so on. These stylized facts, which were at
best simplistic and in most instances simply
wrong, permitted economists to conclude that
developing economies were "different."
However, it took theory to support these
conclusions. Here, one can distinguish several
failures. First, there was misapplication of
good theory. Second, there was what I shall
call the "theory of negative results," which
essentially could be used to provide a rationale
for virtually any trade intervention. Third,
there was good theory harnessed to erroneous
stylized facts.
A. Misapplication of Good Theory
Misapplication of good theory was significant.
37 The identification of comparative
advantage with the two-factor, two-good
model, and the assumption that free trade
would imply that developing countries would
forever specialize in primary commodities,
was an important misapplication. One of the
puzzling aspects of the evolution of thinking
about policy is the degree to which proponents
of open trade regimes failed to refute the allegation
that free trade would forever leave developing
countries specialized in production
of agricultural commodities.38
It was not until the 1970's (see Ronald W.
Jones, 197 ib; Krueger, 1977) that modelsmotivated
in part by the East Asian experiencewere
developed in which three factors of
production (land, labor, and capital) were allocated
among sectors, each of which could
produce many commodities. As the threefactor
models demonstrated, comparative advantage
lies within manufacturing and within
agriculture, and not between them. Thus, poor
unskilled, labor-abundant countries have a
comparative advantage in labor-intensive agricultural
and unskilled labor-intensive manufactured
commodities, while countries with
a much higher land-labor ratio have a comparative
advantage in more land-using agricultural
commodities and their comparative
advantage in manufacturing lies more in goods
with higher capital-unskilled labor ratios. In
these models, the overall trade balance in manufactures
is a function of the size of the manufacturing
sector, itself a function of past
capital accumulation and the land-man ratio.
A second serious misapplication of good
theory arose because of the nonoperational
nature of the theory itself, and the failure to
identify circumstances under which policy implementation
might be incentive compatible
and potentially increase welfare. A key culprit
in this case was the interpretation of the infant
industry argument. As I already discussed, it
was widely touted as a basis for import substitution,
and generally recognized as a "legitimate"
case for a departure from free trade.
One can hardly argue with the proposition
that the presence of a positive externality gives
rise to a basis for intervention; if the externality
is dynamic and temporary, then temporary
3 Another example of misapplication of good theory
was the early defense, such as that of Hagen (1958), of
protection because of a domestic distortion. But it took the
development of the theory of domestic distortions to correct
that, as is discussed below.
38 Some of Johnson's (1958) research on trade and
growth went some way toward refuting this proposition,
but still in a 2 x 2 framework. Moreover, Johnson's work
implied that labor-abundant countries would, while accumulating
capital, undergo "ultra anti-trade biassed"
growth, which seemed to support import substitution.