principal exogenous, also called "realization,
" variables we chose:
R1. The growth rate of real GNP, out to
2010, in the absence of new environmental
bounds on energy technologies.

R2. Capital cost levels of present and potential
future energy technologies.
R3. Availabilities of oil, gas, uranium, at
various costs of extraction.
R4. Long-run price and income elasticities
of demand for end-use energy
forms.
The "policy" variables represent the hypothetical
bounds already described,
P1. Moratoria on new nuclear construction.

P2. Limits placed on output of coal and
shale oil.
Forming a third category, the "blend" variables
have traits of both realization and
policy variables,
Bi. Discount rates applied to future
benefits and costs.
B2. Oil import price or quantity ceilings.
The method applied was to compare the
already specified projection of a rising future
GNP in which no bounds have been imposed
on the use of energy technologies (the
base case), with other projections in which
such a bound or bounds were imposed. This
procedure was carried out for each of three
long-run models of the U.S. energy sector.
The numerical inputs into the three models
were the same for almost all realization and
blend variables, except for the price and income
elasticities of demand, which were
specific to each model. Two ideas central to
current economic analysis entered into this
procedure. One is the use of an optimization
algorithm to simulate the behavior of a
competitive market economy, in any one
year, and through time. The other is the use
of long-run elasticities of demand. For demand
by end-use consumers, these are to be
based on econometric analysis of timeseries
and/or cross sections of income,
prices, and quantities consumed. For industrial
demand, a process analysis of alternative
industrial energy-using processes
may add valuable information.
The principal finding was the proportionally
small effect on GNP of sizable cuts
in energy use below its base case growth
path. In interpreting this finding, note that
the optimization procedure implies an assumption
whereby the economy responds to
anticipated changes by minimizing the cost
of adaptation. The principal means of adaptation
are changes in the type and composition
of the capital equipment for the extraction,
conversion, transport, and use of
energy-at the regular time for replacement
or earlier.
Table 2 shows the numerical results. For
two models, with price elasticities of -.25
and -.4, respectively, policies entailing percentage
cuts in energy use out of the base
case that gradually increase to between 10
and 20 percent in the year 2010, were found
to cut not more than 2 percent out of the
discounted sum of annual real GNP, 1975-
2010, and a comparably small percentage
out of GNP for the single year 2010. The
instruments of the curtailment of growth in
energy use were, in row (1) of the table, the
placement of bounds on specific energy supply
technologies described above. In row
(2), a zero-energy-growth path is simulated
by the imposition of a hypothetical "conservation
tax" on primary energy flows. The
rate of this fictitious tax must increase as
the GNP continues to grow in spite of the
downward pull from the zero-energy-growth
path.
Another finding, reported in row (2), was
that for the effects of the larger cuts in
energy use, the value of the long-run price
elasticity of demand for energy becomes
crucial. In a sensitivity analysis made with
one model, a zero-energy-growth policy
from 1975 on, leading to a 60 percent cut in
energy use out of the base case in 2010,
was found to induce only a 2 percent cut in
cumulative discounted GNP if that price
elasticity is -.5, but a 30 percent cut if it is