policy formulation can be invaluable. If the
right stylized facts can be used as a basis for
theory, and theorists have good indications of
the relative quantitative importance of various
phenomena, it is clearly far more likely that
the theory itself can make a useful contribution.
In the case of trade policy and development,
the demonstrations that there were responses
to incentives and that developing countries
could expand export earnings and did have
comparative advantage in other than primary
commodities, were clearly crucial to improved
understanding of the relationship of trade to
development.
For that reason, high marks must go to the
analytical research that pointed to measurement
techniques such as effective protection
and cost benefit, which enabled policy makers
and their analysts to obtain empirical quantification,
however rough, of the relevant
magnitudes.47
In like manner, the empirical demonstration
of the similarity of policy responses across developing
countries, and of the wide and largely
irrational variation in incentives for importcompeting
industries, increased understanding
of what was wrong with existing policies.
Overturning, or more accurately interpreting,
the accepted stylized facts, therefore, was
a first prerequisite for developing a better theory
of trade policy for development. But theory
was important in many ways, in addition
to pointing to appropriate measurement tools.
First of all, good policy-relevant theory provided
blueprints for those windows of opportunity
in which governments genuinely sought
to improve economic performance, as was the
case in Taiwan and Korea in the early 1960's,
and in Chile, Mexico, and India in later decades,
to name just a few.48 Having the "blueprints"
on hand from good theory is obviously
a major contribution. As already noted, however,
that theory is often relatively dull -such
as comparative advantage-rather than the
more exciting and refined results of complex
models.
Second, theory was invaluable when it
showed why simple interpretations of received
doctrine were in fact wrong. This was the case
with the theory of first-best intervention in the
case of domestic distortions, and in the case
with comparative advantage as interpreted to
mean developing countries would specialize in
the production of primary commodities, and
with the infant industry argument.
These considerations suggest that research
results, in order to be most likely to be amenable
to policy relevance, should be interpretable
into phenomena that are observable,
hopefully quantifiable, and recognizable by
the policy maker. A negative result, such as
that theory does not always tell us, can be
counterproductive precisely because the policy
maker is informed only that a certain generalization
(such as comparative advantage
and the value of free trade) is not without
exception; the generalization can then be
ignored.
A more general statement of the problems
inherent in theorems which show that major
propositions are "not generally true" would
encompass all of that theory which is cast in
terms of "anything can happen." While it is
certainly true that there are conditions under
which a wide range of outcomes (Paretoinferior,
a bad equilibrium, Pareto-superior,
etc.) are possible from the same policy instrument,
it would have challenged the skills of
even the most superb theorist to attempt to develop
a case for the sorts of chaotic policies
prevalent in Turkey in 1957, in Ghana in 1983,
and in Argentina in the late 1980's. It is far
too easy for analysts to ignore the fact that "an
exception" does not rationalize all possible
policy alternatives to free trade.
There is a criterion for efficient resource allocation,
equating domestic and international
marginal rates of transformation. Even if there
are "dynamic" factors which contravene part
of the static efficiency criterion, they too are
measurable. Yet the "anything can happen"
theories do not provide guides as to how the
4 There is another example from a related field. As is
well known, multilateral negotiations with regard to agricultural
protection were completely stalled until the
1980's. In the 1980's, economists at the OECD proposed
the use of a "producer subsidy equivalent" to measure
the degree of government intervention in various agricultural
commodities across countries. That tool permitted
negotiations to begin restricting and dismantling agricul-  tural protection.
48 See Arnold C. Harberger (1993) for a discussion of
the roles played by economists in some key policy reform
episodes.