be made additive. For a quick appreciation of
this, assume that total factor productivity grew
by 80 percent in one industry over a decade,
by 60 percent in another industry, and by 50
percent in a third. If their initial value added
amounted to $100 billion, $200 billion, and
$300 billion, respectively, then the real cost
reduction of the first was $80 billion, that of
the second was $120 billion, and that of the
third $150 billion. So we can say that, measured
at initial prices, the real cost reduction
of the three together was $350 billion over the
decade in question. I truly think that the notion
of real cost reduction being additive in this
way came to my mind, and is easily seen by
others, just as a consequence of the label. The
idea of additivity does not follow nearly so
easily from the labels "technical advance"
and "total factor productivity."
Anyway, this vision of the growth process
opens up many new vistas and gives us many
new challenges. To me, it gives life to the residual,
viewed as real cost reduction, in a way
that remote macroeconomic externalities
never did. It gives the residual body, in the
sense that the number of dollars saved by real
cost reduction is a tangible and measurable
quantity. It gives the residual a name (real cost
reduction), an address (the firm), and a face
(the face of the entrepreneur, the CEO, the
production manager, etc.) And, finally, we
shall see that there can be vastly different expressions
on that face, even as we move from
firm to firm in a given industry, as the TFP
experience of a period moves from sharply
positive to devastatingly negative.
I. Yeast versus Mushrooms: Part I
Table 1 is based on the numerical example
just given, plus the information that the remaining
industries (say, in the economy) together
had an initial value added of $1,400
billion and experienced real cost reduction of
$150 billion over the period. Setting out data
in the format of Table 1 allows us to make
statements like "15 percent ($300 b./$2,000
b.) of the industries (measured by initial value
added) accounted for 40 percent ($200 b./
$500 b.) of the real cost reduction (RCR) of
the period" and "30 percent ($600 b./$2,000
b.) of the industries accounted for 70 percent
($350 b./$500 b.) of the period's RCR."
I stumbled on this way of presenting data on
real cost reduction in the course of writing a
background paper (Harberger, 1990) for the
World Bank's World Development Report of
1991. Once I saw it, I immediately embraced
it, because it helped me communicate to others
what I call the "yeast versus mushrooms" issue.
The analogy with yeast and mushrooms
comes from the fact that yeast causes bread to
expand very evenly, like a balloon being filled
with air, while mushrooms have the habit of
popping up, almost overnight, in a fashion that
is not easy to predict. I believe that a "yeast"
process fits best with very broad and general
externalities, like externalities linked to the
growth of the total stock of knowledge or of
human capital, or brought about by economies
of scale tied to the scale of the economy as a
whole. A "mushroom" process fits more
readily with a vision such as ours, of real cost