A. Importance of Norms in Motivation:
Some Examples
But religion is only one of the many realms
where people have such an ideal. To appreciate
the ubiquity of norms in motivation, it is useful
to see some further examples. Those examples
will demonstrate that people tend to be happy
when they live up to how they think they should
be; and they are, correspondingly, unhappy
when they fail to live up to those norms.
For the audience for this lecture, most of
whom are professors, teaching provides an es-
pecially familiar example. We have a view of
what it means to be a good teacher. On our
lucky days, when we live up to our standards
and our classes go well, we tend to be happy; on
our off days, when something goes awry in
class, we may even feel quite miserable.
Such motivation in the workplace is the rule,
rather than the exception. Most workers, like
teachers, care about the conduct of their jobs.
Randy Hodson (2001), who surveyed ethnogra-
phies of the US workplace, found that most
employees care about their dignity at work.
They want to conceive of what they do as use-
ful. And they feel a lack of dignity if they are
thwarted, either by their own actions or by the
actions of others. Those who are unable to get
such satisfaction are likely to show their dis-
pleasure by acting up in some way or other.
Studs Terkel's Working (1972) captures in a
single volume much of the ethnographic find-
ings summarized by Hodson. Terkel interviews
people from many different occupations about
their feelings about their jobs and concludes that
people "search for daily meaning as well as
daily bread" (1972, xi). Some of the interview-
ees are successful in this search: like the stone
mason, who cruises his Indiana county and
basks in pride as he not infrequently passes his
past work. At the opposite extreme is an Illinois
steelworker, whose work denies him the dignity
he seeks. He takes out his frustration at work by
being disrespectful, and, after hours, by getting
into tavern brawls. Most workers are some-
where between these extremes, but in all cases,
following Terkel, they have a feeling for how
they should behave at work. It is not just about  the money; it is also about living up to an ideal
about who they think they should be.
Such belief regarding how people should be-
have, and their behavior in accordance with
such belief, goes beyond the workplace. It af-
fects disparate areas, from playing golf to life in
the family. Betty Friedan's Feminine Mystique
gives what may be as good a description of
norms and their impact on people's lives as can
be found anywhere-in this case regarding the
norms for middle-class women of the previous
generation. Here is a brief sample of her de-
scription:
"Millions of women lived their lives in
the image of those pretty pictures of the
American suburban housewife, kissing
their husbands goodbye in front of the
picture window, depositing their station-
wagonsful of children at school, and smil-
ing as they ran the new electric waxer
over the spotless kitchen floor .... Their
only dream was to be perfect wives and
mothers; their highest ambition was to  have five children and a beautiful house,
their only fight to get and keep their hus-
bands .... They gloried in their role as
women, and wrote proudly on the census
blank: "Occupation, housewife" (Friedan
1963, 18).
Most women lived up to these norms. Some of
these were dissenters, like Friedan herself, who
disagreed with them, but felt compelled, never-
theless, to follow a norm with which they dis-
agreed. Friedan says they suffered from "the
problem without a name." In our terms, they were
losing utility because they were failing to live up
to what one part of them thought they should do.
We may appeal to religious texts, to work
ethnographies, and, like Friedan, to women's
magazines to see the role of norms. But is there
yet harder data, some form of natural experi-
ment, that indicates the importance of norms?
The sociologist Erving Goffman has found such
an example. He observed the behavior of chil-
dren of different ages when they were brought
to the local merry-go-round. Because appropri-
ate activity differs by age, the children should
have predictably different reactions. For the
toddlers, riding a wooden horse is an accom-
plishment. They show their joy at fulfilling what
they should do with smiles and waves as they
pass by. In contrast, for older children, there is