generally have quite low benefits under current
law and could do substantially better under a
mixed system (Feldstein and Liebman, 2002b).
Divorced women would benefit if the total of
the husbands and wives' PRAs are pooled and
divided at the time of divorce.
While a PRA itself does not cause any income
redistribution, the redistributive structure
of the pay-as-you-go benefits could, in principle,
be changed to make the combined benefit
achieve any degree of redistribution.
In summary, it seems clear from the research
that has been done that the current pay-as-you-go
system could be gradually replaced with a mixed
system that includes investment-based personal
retirement accounts in a way that maintains or
exceeds the benefits that are projected in current
law, while sharply reducing the long-run cost of
achieving those benefits. This transition could be
financed with relatively small additional PRA saving
by individuals or by using existing payroll tax
revenue. Even if the tax revenue is used, the initial
fiscal deficit would not decrease national saving
because of the concurrent increase in private saving.
National saving would rise in the long run
because the PRA savings would exceed the increased
fiscal deficits.

A mixed system would eliminate the need for
a future increase in the Social Security payroll
tax and would, therefore, avoid the political risk
that future taxpayers would be unwilling to raise
taxes to finance promised benefits. It could be
designed so that, despite the asset price uncertainty,
there would be little risk that the combined
benefits would be less than the currently
projected pay-as-you-go benefits. The remaining
asset-price risk could be substantially reduced
by guarantees that could be produced by
the private financial market.
VI. Medicare

Medicare, the federal health care program for
those over age 65, is more difficult to reform
than either unemployment insurance or Social
Security. The program is more complex and the
reaction to proposed changes is often more
emotional. And yet without reform, Medicare
costs will rise even more dramatically than the
cost of Social Security retirement benefits, reflecting
the increasing numbers of the very old
(who consume relatively more medical care)
and the changing medical technology that pro-
vides new opportunities to spend money to prolong
life and increase the quality of life.
Before looking at Medicare, it is useful to
consider the basic theory of health insurance
and the current way that the government provides
a kind of quasi-social insurance for the
population under age 65 by its favorable tax
treatment of employer payments for health insurance.
This is important in itself and suggests
an approach that may be useful for reforming
Medicare.

The basic theory of insurance implies that a
risk-averse individual will prefer an actuarially
fair insurance policy to an uncertain and exogenous
distribution of potential losses. But the
distribution of potential health spending is not
exogenous and the gain from risk reduction
must be balanced against the distorting effect of
insurance on the demand for care. As insurance
becomes more complete, the marginal gain
from additional risk reduction declines and the
marginal deadweight loss from distorting the
demand for health care rises. At the optimum
level of health insurance (e.g., at the optimum
coinsurance rate) there is a deadweight loss
caused by the distortion in the demand for care
because individuals, advised by their doctors,
make decisions about diagnosis and treatment
based on a net price of care that is very much
less than the cost of producing that care. That
level of insurance is, however, efficient because
the deadweight loss from distorted demand is
less than the gain from risk reduction.
In actual practice, the demand for health insurance
is greatly increased by the tax treatment
of excluding employer payments for health insurance
from the taxable income of employees.
Allowing employees to buy health insurance
with pretax dollars in this way changes the
nature of health insurance. For someone with a
marginal tax rate of 40 percent, the ability to
buy health insurance at a cost of only 60 cents
per dollar of premium substantially increases
the demand for health insurance with low deductibles
and low coinsurance rates. This increases
the deadweight loss caused by the
distortion in demand for care.
Direct attempts to eliminate or even reduce
the tax subsidy or to constrain it by requiring
minimum deductibles or coinsurance rates have
not been politically successful. When the Reagan
Administration proposed to limit the employers'
deduction for health insurance premiums,