the United States. But the recent experience
of Britain has been almost equally
disenchanting. One gathers that there may
be Canadian politicians who now believe
that a combination of unemployment and
inflation is not the best platform on which
to fight a general election.
We should not deny ourselves either the
instruction or the amusement that comes
from the recent history of the United
States in this matter. Four years ago Mr.
Nixon came to office with a firm commitment
to neoclassical orthodoxy. In this he
was supported by some of its most distinguished
and devout exponents in all the
land. His subsequent discovery that he
was a Keynesian involved no precipitate
or radical departure from this faith. The
discovery came thirty-five years after The
General Theory; as I have just noted, all
neo-Keynesian policy rests firmly on the
paramount role of the market. But then a
year and. a half ago, facing reelection, he
found that his economists' comnmitment
to neoclassical and Keynesian orthodoxy,
however admirable in the abstract, was a
luxury that he could no longer afford. He
apostatized to wage and price control; so,
with exemplary flexibility of mind, did
his economists although admittedly this
acceptance of the real world has still to
survive its critical test which is the
apostates' return to computers and classrooms.
But our admiration for this pliability
should not keep us from recalling that,
when the President changed course, no
American economists were anywhere
working on the policy he was forced by
circumstances to adopt. And it is even
more disturbing that few are now working
on the policy which we have been forced
to follow.
More economists, in fact, are still concerning
themselves with the effort to reconcile
controls with the neoclassical
market. This has involved an unrewarding
combination of economics and archeology
with wishful thinking. It holds that an
inflationary momentum developed during
the late 1960's in connection with the
financing--or underfinancing of the Vietnam
war. And inflationary expectation
became part of business and trade union
calculation. The momentum and expectation
still survive. The controls are necessary
until these are dissipated. Then the
neoclassical and neo-Keynesian world will
return, along with the appropriate policies,
in all their quiet comfort. We may be sure
that will not happen. Nor will we expect it
to happen if we see the role of power and
political decision in modern economic behavior.

II
In place of the market system, we must
now assume that for approximately half of
all economic output there is a power or
planning system. (The latter term seems
to me more descriptive, less pejorative and
thus preferable.) The planning system consists
in the United States of, at the most,
2,000 large corporations. In their operation
they have power that transcends the
market. They rival where they do not
borrow from the power of the state. My
views on these matters will be familiar at
least to some, and I shall spare myself the
pleasure of extensive repetition. I cannot
think that the power of the modern corporation,
the purposes for which it is used
or the associated power of the moclern
union would seem implausible or even very
novel were they not in conflict with the
vested (loctrine.
Thus we agree that the modern corporation,
either by itself or in conjunction
with others, has extensive influence over
its prices and its major costs. Can we
doubt that it goes beyond its prices and
the market to persuade its customers? Or
that it goes back of its costs to organize
supply? Or that from its earnings or the
possession of financial afiliates it seeks to