position where it can take advantage of the
consumer by raising prices. Firms then make an
implicit contract with their customers: they will
not change their prices unjustifiably. Since such
an implicit contract is easier to make (and enforce)
regarding nominal prices than real prices,
the implicit guarantee is in nominal terms. Nakamura
and Steinsson have also discovered a
phenomenon that suggests strikingly that firms
do behave this way. Goods in store 126 (chosen
for its completeness of data) of Dominicks Finer
Foods chain frequently go on sale; when the
sale ends, their nominal price returns to the
exact same level. Such behavior is consistent
with the view that consumers think that prices
should not change (for whatever reason); and
that they are also likely to retaliate (change
brands) when prices do change.
I should also remark that in countries where
inflation is very high, customers will expect
price changes to occur frequently, and possibly
be of large magnitude. The inhibitions against
price changes when inflation is low are eroded
at high inflation. Thus, while norms concerning
prices give a negative long-run trade-off between
inflation and unemployment at low inflation,
at high inflation that trade-off could very
well be reversed.
D. Summary
To summarize, there is considerable evidence
of violation of the assumptions and predictions
of natural rate theory. Wages and prices are
nominally rigid; there were no deflationary spirals
in the Great Depression; and questionnaire
respondents act as if they have a positive like for
nominal wage increases.84 This evidence suggests
that wage earners and customers have
views on what wages and prices should be. The
reflection of such views in utility functions produces
trade-offs between inflation and unemployment.
Those trade-offs have significant
implications for economic policy. On the one
hand, central banks should avoid very low targets
for inflation. On the other hand, they should
avoid high inflation, where the trade-offs between
inflation and unemployment may be  reversed.  VIII. Rational Expectations Theory
Our discussion of rational expectations piggybacks
on our previous discussion of the nat-  ural rate.
According to rational expectations theory, insofar
as the central bank changes the money
supply systematically in response to employment
conditions, the public will foresee that
response and change prices and wages exactly
to compensate. The public's anticipation will
then exactly offset the response. Monetary policy
is neutral.85
There are two key assumptions underlying
this neutrality. The obvious one is rational expectations.
To some, rational expectations regarding
the effects of the money supply on
prices and wages would seem to be beyond the
sophistication of most wage and price takers,
and also of most wage and price setters.
Even in the case where all those involved in
buying and selling goods and labor services
have rational expectations, however, the neutrality
results of rational expectations theory
require also that nominal considerations do not
enter into the setting of either wages or prices.
The previous descriptions of the ways in which
nominal wages and prices enter into preference
functions, via employees' views of the wages
that ought to be received and consumers' views
of the prices that ought to be paid, give further
reason why the neutrality results of rational
expectations will be violated. If prices and
wages are affected by people's notions of what
their nominal values should be, monetary policy
can be effective in stabilizing output-and possibly
in raising its long-run level-even in the
presence of rational expectations.
IX. Economic Methodology
We have seen that the absence of norms plays
a key role in each of the five neutralities. Why
have economists made such systematic omissions?
The omission of norms from macroeconomics,
as well as from economics more