Four decades ago, in a brilliant review of
Burns and Mitchell's classic work on business
cycles, Tjalling Koopmans (1947)
sounded a warning against "Measurement
Without Theory." Without theoretical hypotheses
and constructs to orient investigation
and interpret findings, economists risk
the fate of the blind man studying the elephant.

Recent excursions in vector autoregressions
possibly aside, modem econometrics
has generally followed the path of specifying
theoretical relations that make sense in terms
of economic behavior and using empirical
data of time-series or cross sections or both
to estimate the parameters of those relations.
A critical problem, only one surface of which
is touched by Robert Lucas' famous "Critique"
(1976, 1981a), is that key arguments
in most functions are expected values-or
worse, probability distributions-of future
variables. These are generally not observed
and we are reduced to estimating parameters
of current and past variables, for which we
have data we can put into our computers,
and making explicit or, more often, implicit
assumptions about the relation between them
and the relevant but unobservable expectations.

The frailties of all this have long been
apparent in estimation of demand and supply
functions for individual commodities. We
cannot, after all, even be sure of confirming
the "law of demand," that lower prices will
increase quantities demanded. They probably
will not, if they are associated with
expectations of still lower prices in the
future.
Similar critical problems emerged in estimation
of key relations in macroeconomics.
Will an increase in the quantity of money
reduce long-term interest rates? Not, we are
told, if it generates an increased expectation
of inflation or, perhaps, an expectation that
the increase in money will be short-lived and
be reversed in future action by the monetary
authority. What, though, were the expectations,
with regard to inflation or future monetary
operations, that generated the data used
in estimating money demand functions? Can
we be sure that these same expectational
relations apply when we try to forecast the
results of a proposed easing of monetary
policy? And is the assumption that expectations
are "rational" of much help if they are
frequently, as John M. Keynes argued, built
on such uncertain knowledge as to be a
fragile phenomenon of social interaction?
The problem of bringing in critical expectational
variables is brought front and center
in Franco Modigliani's life cycle (1954) and
Milton Friedman's permanent income (1957)
versions of Keynes' consumption function.
Serious problems remain here in considerable
part because of our difficulties predicting
agents' reactions to uncertainty regarding
not only future income but expected
length of life. We thus lack two parameters
defining the resources per unit of time available
for lifetime or permanent consumption.

Difficulties are most excruciating with regard
to investment, which is entirely forward