THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
Security displacing transfers to the elderly from
the government (through the program for the
poor elderly-Old Age Assistance, which became
SSI) and from individuals (through cash
gifts and shared housing).
While the impact on national capital would
be an interesting positive question if we could
answer it well, it is important to recognize the
additional issues needed for a normative analysis.
The goal of Social Security's early generosity
was to raise the consumption of early
cohorts of elderly. Apart from business-cycle
effects, higher consumption implies lower
savings-implying that lower national capital
was required by the goal, not an unintended side
effect. A normative evaluation of the impact of
the redistribution to early cohorts would consider
how much their wages were lower than
those of later cohorts and how little they had
saved, as well as the return on capital. It
would also consider the pattern of transfers
within benefited and paying cohorts. However
such an analysis would come out-balancing
very worthwhile transfers with some less
worthwhile ones-most of the transfers are
now history.
Given the infinite horizon present value budget
constraint of Social Security (in the absence
of transfers from general revenues) this early
generosity is the cause of lower benefits in the
future than could otherwise be afforded. That is,
the legacy of the early generosity of Social
Security shows up in assets that are not there. If
they were present, they would be earning interest
that could contribute to paying for benefits.
The cumulative curve in Figure 1 gives a sense
of the magnitude of the trust fund that is not
there because of Social Security's history. But,
Figure 1 is by cohort, and so does not show how
much larger the trust fund would be today if
every cohort had been on a breakeven basis.
Although such a calculation is doable, it would
not be the best basis for insight into reform
options. Rather, that comes from considering
the elements likely to constrain reform. Past
payments are history and political considerations
suggest that it is unlikely that benefits
will be directly reduced for those already retired
or those nearing retirement, although these benefits
might be affected by changes in tax treatment
or in the inflation indexing of benefits,
changes that would apply to everyone. A partial
picture of that constraint would be that cohorts
over 55 would not be affected by reform.57 The
measure is not exact since cohorts over 55
would be affected by any payroll tax change and
slightly younger cohorts are likely to have limited
changes in benefits as we phase in any
benefit reductions that are part of a reform. An
ideal definition of this constraint would conform
to a theory of political constraints on reform
coming from past generosity. We do not
have a full theory, but this gives a reasonable
sense of the size of the legacy that needs to be
financed from future cohorts.
Peter Orszag and I have referred to the missing
assets on this cohort basis as a legacy debt.58
Thus the legacy debt is not a debt in the traditional
sense of that word, but that term crystallizes
the need to allocate the cost of the assets
that are not there across cohorts. Spreading the
cost of that early generosity across cohorts is
inherent in any plan that restores actuarial balance.
While only an approximation to the real
constraint, the number is roughly $11.5 trillion
(a bit more than one year's GDP). If we were to
go to full funding, then this is roughly the cost
that would fall on the generations during the
buildup to full funding. Alternatively, instead of
ever achieving full funding, we can consider a
wider allocation of the legacy cost by aiming to
preserve a ratio of the legacy cost to taxable
payroll. This would parallel the idea of preserving
the ratio of the public debt (or the interest on
the public debt) to GDP. Spreading the legacy
cost over all future cohorts implies less than full
funding of Social Security. Without extensive
evaluation of its consumption transfers, the effect
of Social Security on national capital is not,
by itself, a basis for concluding that the system
should have been fully funded or should become
fully funded.
The baby boomers are much larger than earlier
cohorts. The 1983 legislation included payroll
tax revenues in excess of current outlays in
order to build a trust fund which would then be
used to finance the retirement of this very large
cohort. That is, taxes were higher early to allow
57 In his charge to the Commission to Strengthen Social
Security, President Bush included the principle that Social
Security reform not affect the benefits of anyone 55 or older
(Commission to Strengthen Social Security, 2002).
58 This is the same as the "closed group" measure of
balance, with the group including everyone 55 and over.
16
MARCH 2004