constraints on the consumption of parents (so they
do not leave bequests); (k) myopia of the parents
regarding children's future tax payments.29
The preceding list gives empirical reasons for
failure of Ricardian equivalence; but, lengthy as
it is, it still ignores its theoretical challenge.
According to that challenge, under economists'
standard assumptions, with perfect certainty and
with perfect foresight, Ricardian equivalence
will occur. Such a result had previously been
unsuspected by economists.30
Two possible conclusions can be drawn from
this surprise. On the one hand, we might continue
to assume that classical assumptions describe
economic behavior. The five neutralities
that are the subject of this paper concern the
realignment to macroeconomics that occurred
as economists gained understanding of the consequences
of classical assumptions from the
mid-1950s to the mid-1970s.
Economists may have been correct in drawing
the conclusion that the early Keynesian economics
was too simplistic and naive. But they
could have drawn another conclusion from this
surprise. In this view, Ricardian equivalence is
a telltale: we do not believe, even in the presence
of perfect foresight and perfect certainty,
that the parent will make an equal and opposite
offset of her social security transfer in terms of
an increased bequest to her child. Something
must be missing from the motivation in Barro's
model; otherwise, it would not have given rise
to results that are so surprising.
B. Douglas Bernheim and Kyle Bagwell
(1988) give further evidence suggesting that
Ricardian equivalence is such a telltale. They
show how the same logic would apply to a
network of gift-givers. Remarkably, any
member of such a network will be indifferent
whether she receives an extra dollar or any
other participant in the network is the recipient.
Such conclusions, suspect as they are,
suggest a problem with the model beyond the
lack of realism involved in perfect foresight
and perfect certainty. They also suggest missing
motivation.
James Andreoni (1989) has put his finger on
what that missing motivation might be.31 A
bequest is a type of gift. The parent will receive
utility from giving such a gift. Ricardian equivalence
will fail if the parent has utility from
gift-giving. With a social security transfer, more
money is hers, and the same consumption allocation
to herself entails a greater gift to her
child. With declining marginal utility for bequestgiving,
she will then divide an increased social
security transfer between additional consumption
for herself and an additional bequest to her child.32
Andreoni thus describes the utility missing
from the standard utility function as that arising
from the "warm glow" from giving. Such a
characterization may be accurate. It also sounds
as if it is very close to classical assumptionsthat
there is nothing fundamentally different
about this additional motivation. But this segment
of the utility function is, in fact, very
different from economists' usual characterization
of motivation. We know that the "warm
glow" does not come from the utility the parent
This argument suggests that a "bequest" is not really what it
seems. This is an argument where the preferences of the
parent do play a role, but quite different from the type of
reason that I think would have surprised the Keynesians. I
want to show that parents who make bequests for the
conventional reasons, because they care about the welfare of
their children, will still routinely violate Ricardian equiva-
lence, even in the absence of most of the commonplace
frictions that almost surely invalidate exact Ricardian equivalence.
29 This was Ricardo's own reason for dismissal of the
argument. He said that the parent would alter her bequest
because she would not take into account the added tax
payments of the child (see Gerald P. O'Driscoll Jr. 1977).
Uncertainty regarding the size of the future tax payments is
different from such myopia, in which the payment is altogether
ignored. But, with quadratic utility and expected
utility maximization, uncertainty regarding the child's fu-
ture tax payments will have no effect on the size of the
parent's bequest.
30 For example, Feldstein (1974) and Feldstein and Pel-
lechio (1979) engage in no theoretical soul-searching regarding
the negative effects of social security on current
savings. There is a voluminous literature (see Roberto Ric-
ciuti 2003) examining the empirical validity of Ricardian
equivalence. Largely because of the problem of endogene-
ity, it is difficult to come to firm conclusions regarding its
empirical validity. There are studies with findings both for
and against such crowding out.
31 See also John Laitner (2002), Laitner and Henry Ohls-
son (2001), Alan S. Blinder (1975) and Michael D. Hurd
(1989), who have also modeled the bequest motive as coming
from the utility of the parent from giving the bequest.
32 Formally, she trades off the marginal utility of her
own consumption against the marginal utility from gift-
giving and the marginal utility she gets from her child's
consumption. In making this trade-off, she takes due ac-
count of the fact that one unit of consumption today is
traded off against (1 + r) units of consumption next period.