cline in the patents per R&D ratio in the
United States (and also in most of the other
countries for which we have data). This
raised the specter of diminishing returns to
R&D and offered the hypothesis of "ex-
haustion of inventive opportunities" as a
potential explanation for the productivity
slowdown.
This hypothesis has been examined re-
cently by various authors. There are basi-
cally two styles of analysis: one focuses di-
rectly on the link, if any, between R&D and
productivity growth (see e.g., Griliches,
1986a; Bronwyn Hall, 1993; Scherer, 1993),
while the other uses patents as indicators of
the output of the R&D effort and looks at
what has happened to the "knowledge-
production function" (see e.g., Griliches,
1990; Ricardo Caballero and Adam Jaffe,
1993; Robert Evenson, 1993; Samuel
Kortum, 1993). The bridge that is missing
between these two approaches would exam-
ine the units in which patents affect produc-
tivity growth and ask whether they have
stayed constant over time. Without such
constancy, no clear interpretation is possi-
ble.
II. Productivity Growth and the Role of R&D
In parallel to the aggregate "residual"
literature, a more micro-oriented approach
had developed. It took the study of techni-
cal change, diffusion, and the role of formal
R&D as its main challenge, with the hope
of bringing more of it within the realm of
economic analysis, helping thereby also to
explain some of this residual away. Using
modern language, one can interpret Edwin
Mansfield's and my own early work on dif-
fusion and on the role of R&D in agricul-
ture and manufacturing as trying to endoge-
nize as much of technical change as was
possible (Griliches, 1957, 1958, 1964;
Mansfield, 1961, 1965). Other important
contributors to this literature were Richard
Nelson, Scherer, Jacob Schmookler, and
Nestor Terleckyj. By expanding the notion
of capital to include also R&D capital and
estimating its effects, this literature docu-
mented the contribution of public and pri-
vate investments in R&D and their spillovers
to the growth of productivity.4 But the mag-
nitude of the estimated effects was modest,
not enough to account for the bulk of the
observed residual or the fluctuations in it
(Griliches, 1988). The experience here was
similar to other attempts to account for the
residual, such as using "embodiment" theo-
ries to magnify the potential effects of capi-
tal accumulation (Denison, 1962; Nelson,
1962) or looking for increasing returns to
scale (Griliches and Vidar Ringstad, 1972).
These various effects are real and nonnegli-
gible, but not large enough.
There is one other way of trying to make
something more out of the R&D story: the
possibility that the productivity impact of
R&D has declined over time-that the co-
efficients have changed. This hypothesis has
been investigated repeatedly by a number of
researchers with mixed results. Studies that
used data through the 1970's and early
1980's found no decline in the relevant co-
efficients. More recent studies that analyze
data through the late 1980's report more
mixed results, varying strongly with how the
computer industry and its deflator are han-
dled in the analysis.5 At the same time, the
stock market's valuation of R&D fell signif-
icantly, both in terms of ex post returns to