other people's smoke, then there would be
a case for considering that the game-form
be so modified that smoking is simply
banned in those gatherings. Whether or not
to make this move must depend crucially on
consequential analysis. The object, in this
case, is the prevention of the state of affairs
in which nonsmokers have to inhale unwillingly
other people's smoke: a situation they
resent and which-it is assumed-they
have a right to avoid. We proceed from
there, through consequential analysis (in an
"inverse" form: from consequences to
antecedents), to the particular game-form
formulation that would not achieve an
acceptable result. The fact that the articulation
of the game-form would be
consequence-independent and preferenceindependent
is not a terribly profound assertion
and is quite consistent with the fundamental
relevance of consequences and
preferences.
The contrast between game-form formulations
and social-choice conceptions of
rights is, thus, less deep than it might first
appear (see Sen, 1992b).42 As in other fields
considered earlier (Section VI), in this area
too, the need to combine procedural concerns
with those of actual events and outcomes
is quite strong.
VIII. Values and Individual Choices
I have so far postponed discussing individual
behavior and rationality, though the
issue has indirectly figured in the preceding
discussions (for example, in dealing with
norms for social choice, individual interest
in social welfare judgments, and determination
of voting behavior). The public choice
tradition has tended to rely a good deal on
the presumption that people behave in a
rather narrowly self-centered way-as homo
economicus in particular, even though
Buchanan (1986 p. 26) himself notes some
"tension" on this issue (see also Geoffrey
Brennan and Loren Lomarsky, 1993). Public
servants inter alia are to be seen as working
for their own well-being and success.
Adam Smith is sometimes described as
the original proponent of the ubiquity and
ethical adequacy of "the economic man,"
but that would be fairly sloppy history. In
fact, Smith (1776, 1790) had examined the
distinct disciplines of "self-love," "prudence,
" "sympathy," "generosity," and
"public spirit," among others, and had discussed
not only their intrinsic importance,
but also their instrumental roles in the success
of a society, and also their practical
influence on actual behavior. The demands
of rationality need not be geared entirely to
the use of only one of these motivations
(such as self-love), and there is plenty of
empirical evidence to indicate that the presumption
of uncompromising pursuit of narrowly
defined self-interest is as mistaken
today as it was in Smith's time.43 Just as it is
necessary to avoid the high-minded sentimentalism
of assuming that all human beings
(and public servants, in particular) try
constantly to promote some selfless "social
good," it is also important to escape what
may be called the "low-minded sentimentalism"
of assuming that everyone is constantly
motivated entirely by personal selfinterest.
44
420n related matters, see also Pattanaik and Suzu-  Imura (1994a, b).
A set of studies on this and related issues is
presented in Jane Mansbridge (1990).  44Efforts to explain every socially motivated action  as some kind of a cunning attempt at maximization of
purely private gain are frequent in part of modern
ecnonomics. There is an interesting question as to  whether the presumption of exclusive self-interested-  ness is a more common general belief in America than
in Europe, without being a general characteristic of
actual behavior. Alexis de Tocqueville thought so:
The Americans... are fond of explaining almost
all the actions of their lives by the principle of  self-interest rightly understood; they show with
complacency how an enlightened regard for
themselves constantly prompts them to assist
one another and inclines them willingly to  sacrifice a portion of their time and property to
the welfare of the state. In this respect, they
frequently fail to do themselves justice; for in
the United States as well as elsewhere people
are sometimes seen to give way to those disinterested
and spontaneous impulses that are
natural to man; but the Americans seldom
admit that they yield to emotions of this kind;
they are more anxious to do honor to their
philosophy than to themselves.
(Tocqueville, 1840 [Book II, Chapter VIII; in the 1945
edition, p. 122]).