ment occurs. Dan Altman and I (Feldstein and
Altman, 1998) explored a variety of such possible
plans. In a typical plan, each individual
would be required to accumulate funds in an
unemployment insurance savings account until
the balance was enough to pay benefits for two
spells of six months at 50 percent of the individual'
s current wage. These funds would be
invested and would earn a market rate of return.
After a transition period to accumulate account
balances, anyone who would be eligible for
unemployment benefits under today's UI rules
would instead be able to withdraw the same
amount from his unemployment insurance savings
account. If a balance remains in the account
when the individual reaches retirement
age, the funds would be available for the individual
to take and spend. An individual who
dies before retirement bequeaths the account
balance. In short, individuals would regard the
funds in the UISA as their own money. For
someone who expects to have a positive balance
in his account until retirement, the UISA plan
would provide the same income protection as
the current UI system, but without any
distortion.
What about individuals who experience so
much unemployment that they use up the funds
in their UISA? Such individuals would be able
to borrow from a government UI fund to receive
the same benefits that they would withdraw if
they had a positive account balance. After they
return to work, they would again save to repay
the loan with interest and to rebuild their UISA
balance. If they expect their account to accumulate
a positive balance in the future, the dollars
that they borrow would be a very real obligation
and the incentives to return to work would not
be distorted by the government loan. They
would have full protection and no distortion
while unemployed and would accumulate personal
wealth after they returned to work.
It is only those who expect that they will have
a negative balance in their account when they
retire for whom this plan would represent no
improvement over current law. For them, the
protection and distortion would be the same as
it is with the current UI rules.
The extent of the gain from introducing unemployment
insurance savings accounts therefore depends
on the proportion of the unemployed who
expect to retire with negative balances and on the
sensitivity of unemployment to the change in in-
centives. Dan Altman and I did some preliminary
empirical analysis of this approach using a sample
of men in the National Longitudinal Survey. We
found that, even with no favorable behavioral response
of unemployment to the improved incentives,
less than 10 percent of benefits would be
paid to those who eventually retire with negative
balances (or who had negative balances when our
data sample ended).
Our analysis thus implied that the UI program
could be redesigned around individual unemployment
insurance savings accounts in a way
that substantially reduces the current distorting
effect while not reducing either the availability
of funds when unemployment occurs or the
protection against relatively large cumulative
amounts of lifetime unemployment. More research
on this potential form of unemployment
insurance would certainly be valuable.
V. Social Security16
Social Security is the largest social insurance
program in the United States, with expenditures
in 2003 of $470 billion, or 22 percent of total
federal government spending. It includes not
only annuities for retirees and survivors but also
a separate program of disability insurance that
accounts for some 15 percent of the total Social
Security outlays. Since the disability insurance
program involves a range of very different issues,
I will not be considering it in this article.
Social Security is now a defined benefit, payas-
you-go program in contrast to the defined
contribution, investment-based structure of most
private pensions. In a defined benefit program,
an individual's benefit at retirement depends on
his earnings during his working years and not
on the performance of asset prices during that
time. The program is a pay-as-you-go one because
most of the payroll taxes collected in each
year are used to pay concurrent benefits. There
is not the kind of asset accumulation and financial
investment that there would be in a private
16 Feldstein and Liebman (2002a) provides a survey for
the Handbook of Public Economics of the large theoretical
and empirical literature on Social Security. See also my Ely
Lecture to the American Economic Association (Feldstein,
1996a) and a forthcoming article in the Journal of Economic
Perspectives (Feldstein, 2005b) that deals with the current
reform debate in more detail.