VI. Consumers and Medicare Part D
Medicare's Part D drug plan is extraordinarily
complex. This government program
takes the cake, the candles, the
platter, and the crumbs.
Kathleen Pender,
San Francisco Chronicle
Medicare Part D is not that difficult to
understand. There has been a lot of confusing
information in the news about Part
D Medicare.
OregonHealthInsurance.com
The new Medicare Part D program that began
operation on January 1, 2006, provides prescription
drug coverage through Medicareapproved
plans offered by private insurance
companies and HMOs. Consumers in the Medicare
population can choose to opt out, or to
enroll in one of the private plans available in
their geographic area. This is a large and
complex government program that provides
substantial entitlements for the elderly and substantial
insurance against catastrophic drug
costs. If the entire eligible Medicare population
of 41 million were to enroll in this program,
then at current levels of prescription drug use,
the net subsidy from general government revenues
would be about $44.8 billion per year; this
includes some double counting of Medicaid,
veterans, and other programs that currently
cover prescription drug costs, and assumes that
all employer and union plans meet Medicare
requirements and qualify for the subsidy. There
is an adverse selection problem. If the approximately
27 percent of the elderly whose annual
pharmacy bills are currently below $842, the
breakeven point in 2006, were to delay enrollment
until health conditions warrant, the net
cost of the program would rise another $4.2
billion. However, moral hazard is the bigger
issue.4 In the Medicare population, people with
prescription drug coverage average 1.1 more
prescriptions than those without. If the 26 percent
of the population who currently pay all

their pharmacy bills enroll in Part D, experience
this increase in number of prescriptions, and
face the current average monthly cost of a new
prescription, $66, then this increases the cost of
the program by $6.8 billion. In these worst
cases, the effect of adverse selection and moral
hazard together is projected to increase the cost
of the program to $55.8 billion.
The creation of a market in which private
companies compete to offer coverage, and in
which consumers have choices of carriers and
plans, was an important element in the Part D
legislation. For economists, it is an interesting
economic policy experiment in whether the
benefits of competition can overcome the problems
of adverse selection and moral hazard that
always lurk in private insurance markets;
whether the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) can efficiently manage its principle/
agent and underwriting relationship with
private insurers; and whether consumers can
understand and evaluate plan alternatives in
their own self-interest. In 2004, the National
Institutes of Health asked research groups working
on the economics of aging if they could
provide information on the impact of the Part D
program. My research group attempted to do
this by modifying a survey we were planning to
study health perceptions and choices of the elderly.
During the week of November 7-15,
2005, just before enrollment for Part D began,
we surveyed 4,739 persons age 50 and older and
gathered information on health conditions and
prescription drug use, knowledge and enrollment
intentions for Part D, and preferences
across different plans. Our initial findings are
given in Joachim Winter et al. (2005). I will
summarize a few findings here, with particular
attention to the question of whether consumers
are sufficiently self-reliant to take advantage of
the choices offered by the private market structure
of this program.
The Part D program is complex because of its
interactions with existing employer or unionprovided
drug coverage and with Medigap insurance,
and its provisions for means-tested cost
reductions for low-income consumers. There
are five main classes of eligible consumers:
* Standard Medicare, including those with
Medigap policies that do not cover drugs