If nominal interest rates are 9 percent and
inflation runs at 4 percent, should we include
all of interest receipts in income? Or should
we not recognize that 4 percent of the value
of existing interest-bearing securities is being
eaten away each year by inflation? Must not
this amount be taken out of interest receipts,
to keep capital intact, before we can recognize
income? In fact, of course, we do not do
this in our measures of personal income or
national income or the distribution of income
or anywhere else, to my knowledge-or
even in the computation of taxable income.
Our national income statistics include imputations
for a number of nonmarket items
of output including, most importantly, net
rent of owner-occupied housing. But what
about automobiles and other durable goods?
Are the transportation services of a car consumption
when we rent one from Hertz or
Avis but not consumption if we own the car
ourselves? But if they are consumption, are
we not obliged to include their value, net of
the car's depreciation (but plus real capital
gains), in income?
If we pay a housekeeper we create income
according to conventional measures. Should
we not record income, as well, if the work of
the housekeeper is done by an unpaid member
of the household?3 If we did, we would
note an enormous increase, in particular, in
the amount of income earned by women,
and consumed by men, women, and children.
We would also be forced to lower our
estimates of the increases in national income
as women leave unpaid household work for
jobs in the marketplace; we would have to
offset the increase in market earnings with
the reduction in the value of nonmarket output.

We might also alter our views of the presumed
decline in productivity growth. Average
labor productivity growth falls, in conventional
measures, as women entering the
labor force continue to fill disproportionately
lower-paying and hence less productive
jobs. But if the jobs they take, while less
productive than the average of those in the
labor force, are actually more productive
than unpaid jobs in the home, as appears
likely if only on the evidence that women do
take them, average total labor productivity
will be increased even as average market
labor productivity may be declining.4
Conventional measures of income include
various items that might better be excluded,
more appropriately viewed as expenses related
to work. If a firm arranges transportation
for its workers or if workers have to
travel in connection with their jobs we do
not include the cost of the transportation
services in income. But if workers have to
pay for their own commuting expense-as
most do-the portion of wages devoted to
this is counted as part of income.
We might include in consumption and income,
though, at least some of the value of
three-martini and other lunches and the variety
of amenities-fitness centers, club memberships,
vacation retreats, and conventions
combining as much play as work in exotic
locations-supplied in and out of corporate
offices. And we might impute income to capital
invested by government and impute output
to the value of services produced by this
capital. The value of public education, we
may note, is taken as the wages and salaries
paid to teachers and janitors. We do not
include, as we would if education were provided
by private business, any of capital
costs that would be measured by interest on
government debt, depreciation on buildings
and equipment or "profit."
We do include in gross national product
all of what we measure as government output.
Yet much of it is clearly intermediate in
character. If private firms are forced to hire
more security guards, the result is either no
change in national income or product if the
extra cost is taken out of profits, or an
increase in nominal but not real product if
prices rise. But if government hires more
police, nominal and real national income
and product increase. It may well be argued
3I am informed (by Lawrence Klein) that Norway
once proposed the inclusion of housewives' output in
national income and product and, for a time, estimated
it.
4I am indebted to Nancy Barrett for this point. See
Barrett and Ines Bustillo (1985).