economics but also in the other social
sciences led to the development of what is
now called "organization theory," and this
is now a field in the better business schools;
but not much of this has seeped into the
mainstream of economic theory.
Some economic theorists today are beginning
to pay serious attention to the beginnings
of a theory of information, and
increasing attention is being paid to problems
of decision making under uncertainty.
But here again too little attention tends
to be paid to the changing conditions under
which information is collected and processed,
and the manner in which institutional
arrangements affect the way in
which the future is viewed and attitudes
toward uncertainty change.
There is another and indeed startling
respect in which pure micro-economic theory
tends to ignore the changing institutional
environment. This has to do with
the steadily increasing role of government
in the functioning of markets. In neoclassical
general equilibrium theory, there
is no place for any kind of public authority.
Of course, we have the field of public
finance, which on the theoretical side and
at the micro level does borrow from neoclassical
theory; and, as Walter Heller reminded
us last year, cost-benefit analysis
and tax-incidence theory have helped
economists to develop a rationale for many
types of government decision making.
There is also a growing literature on the
economics of government decision making
in a range of problem areas-from pollution
to military spending to housing and
education. But the pure micro theorist
finds no role for a public authority in his
analysis of the determinants of general
equilibrium. (See Bent Hansen, p. 92.)
Here we encounter an important difference
between micro and macro theory.
Much of macro theory (but by no means
all) tends to be policy oriented and to have
a strong normative orientation. It is concerned
both with policy variables and with
variables that can be, directly or indirectly,
influenced by policy. While there is a good
deal of macro theory in which the possible
role of government is ignored, much of
theoretical macroeconomics does, either
explicitly or by implication, leave an important
role for government.
Although macro-economic theory does
not ignore the role of government, we can
still find plenty of examples of the failure
of macro theory to reflect the changing institutional
environment. One of the most
striking examples undoubtedly involves
what little we have in the way of a theory
of inflation. The problem is most acute
with respect to accounting for inflationary
trends since World War II.
A number of explanations are currently
circulating regarding the tendency toward
accelerating inflation in the last decade or
more. The purely monetarist one is the
simplest and makes no reference to a
changing institutional structure. It tends
to ignore the sources and nature of the
pressures, operating through government,
which lead to changes in the supply of
money. An increasing number of economists,
monetarists and Keynesians, emphasize
the existence of a natural rate of
unemployment, with the implication that
government policies to expand aggregate
demand, by pushing unemployment to or
below the natural rate, lead to accelerating
inflation. But advocates of the natural rate
hypothesis have little to say about why the
natural rate, if it exists, is what it is today,
and how and why it has changed over the
years. Much of the work in this area tends
to be done in an institutional vacuum, including
the recent work on the formation
of price expectations.
I think it is fair to say that we still lack
a general theory with a significant time
dimension of the nature of the inflationary
process and how this process is affected by
the changing institutional setting. Gunnar