key component of the cost of capital, required for
assessing the impacts of rapidly growing stocks
of computers, communications equipment, and
software.
In Section III I analyze the impact of the 1995
acceleration in the information technology price
decline on U.S. economic growth. I introduce a
production possibility frontier that encompasses
substitutions between outputs of consumption
and investment goods, as well as inputs of cap-
ital and labor services. This frontier treats IT
equipment as part of investment goods output
and the capital services from this equipment as
a component of capital input.
Capital input has been the most important
source of U.S. economic growth throughout the
postwar period. More rapid substitution toward
information technology has given much addi-
tional weight to components of capital input
with higher marginal products. The vaulting
contribution of capital input since 1995 has
boosted growth by nearly a full percentage
point. The contribution of IT accounts for more
than half of this increase. Computers have been
the predominant impetus to faster growth, but
communications equipment and software have
made important contributions as well.
The accelerated information technology price
decline signals faster productivity growth in
IT-producing industries. In fact, these industries
have been the source of most of aggregate pro-
ductivity growth throughout the 1990's. Before
1995 this was due to the decline of productiv-
ity growth elsewhere in the economy. The IT-
producing industries have accounted for about
half the surge in productivity growth since 1995,
but faster growth is not limited to these industries.
I conclude that the decline in IT prices will
continue for some time. This will provide in-
centives for the ongoing substitution of IT for
other productive inputs. Falling IT prices also
serve as an indicator of rapid productivity
growth in IT-producing industries. However, it
would be premature to extrapolate the recent
acceleration in productivity growth in these in-
dustries into the indefinite future, since this de-
pends on the persistence of a two-year product
cycle for semiconductors.
In Section IV I outline research opportunities
created by the development and diffusion of
information technology. A voluminous and rap-
idly expanding business literature is testimony
to the massive impact of IT on firms and prod-
uct markets. Highest priority must be given to a
better understanding of the markets for semi-
conductors. Although several models of the
market for semiconductors already exist, none
explains the shift from a three-year to a two-
year product cycle.
The dramatic effects of information technol-
ogy on capital and labor markets have already
generated a substantial and growing economic
literature, but many important issues remain to
be resolved. For capital markets the relationship
between equity valuations and growth prospects
merits much further study. For labor markets
more research is needed on investment in infor-
mation technology and substitution among dif-
ferent types of labor.
I. The Information Age
The development and deployment of infor-
mation technology is the foundation of the
American growth resurgence. A mantra of the
"new economy"-faster, better, cheaper-cap-
tures the speed of technological change and
product improvement in semiconductors and
the precipitous and continuing fall in semicon-
ductor prices. The price decline has been trans-
mitted to the prices of products that rely heavily
on semiconductor technology, like computers
and telecommunications equipment. This tech-
nology has also helped to reduce the cost of
aircraft, automobiles, scientific instruments, and
a host of other products.
Modem information technology begins with
the invention of the transistor, a semiconductor
device that acts as an electrical switch and en-
codes information in binary form. A binary digit
or bit takes the values zero and one, correspond-
ing to the off and on positions of a switch. The
first transistor, made of the semiconductor ger-
manium, was constructed at Bell Labs in 1947
and won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956 for
the inventors-John Bardeen, Walter Brattain,
and William Shockley.4
The next major milestone in information tech-
nology was the coinvention of the integrated cir-
cuit by Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments in 1958