The ceremonial address of the President
of the American Economic Association is
an art form which, I imagine like most of
my predecessors, I have thoughtfully reviewed.
On occasion, in the past, the addresses
have dealt with some substantive
problem of our subject or some afflicting
problem of the economy. More often they
have dealt, always a shade critically, with
the methodology of economics. While accepting
the larger science there has been
adverse comment on the detailed elements
of its practice. Economics is insufficiently
normative. Model building has become an
end, not a means. For several recent years
in succession the criticism-which involved
a certain element of personal introspection-
included an exceptionally grave
attack on mathematical economics. The
style of these addresses, I might note in
passing, is as distinctive as the subject
matter. It features the thoughtful solemnity
of men who sense that we are speaking
for the ages. It may be worth a moment's
time, on these great occasions, to recall
that ours is a subject which features defeated
expectations.
I am moved this evening to depart from
the established rites. I should like to concern
myself with basic questions of assumption
and structure. If this breaks with
tradition, it does not break with present
professional tendency. We meet at a time
when criticism is general when the larger
body of established theory is under extensive
attack. Within the last half-dozen
years what before was simply called economics
in the nonsocialist world has come
to be designated neoclassical economics
with appropriate overtures to the Keynesian
and post-Keynesian development.
From being a general and accepted theory
of economic behavior this has become a
special and debatable interpretation of
such behavior. For a new and notably
articulate generation of economists a reference
to neoclassical economics has become
markedly pejorative.
I would judge as well as hope that the
present attack will prove decisive. The
established theory has reserves of strength.
It sustains much minor refinement which
does not raise the question of overall
validity or usefuliness. It survives strongly
in the textbooks although even in this
stronghold one senses anxiety among the
more progressive or commercially sensitive
authors. Perhaps there are limits to
what the young will accept.
And the arrangements by which orthodoxy
is conserved in the modern academy
also remain formidable. In its first half
century or so as a subject of instruction
and research, economics was subject to
censorship by outsiders. Businessmen and
their political and ideological acolytes
kept watch on departments of economics
and reacted promptly to heresy, the latter
being anything that seemed to threaten
the sanctity of property, profits, a proper
tariff policy, a balanced budget, or which
involved sympathy for unions, public
ownership, public regulation or, in any
organized way, for the poor. The growing
power and self-confidence of the educational
estate, the formidable and growing
complexity of our subject and, no doubt,
the increasing acceptability of our ideas
has largely relieve(d us of this intervention.