"economic discomfort index." That index
(which according to Michael Lovell appears to
have some empirical support) is the sum of unemployment
and inflation. The index used in my
analysis is a weighted average of the cumulated
unemployment and cumulated inflation over the
path. The weights express the relative social
concern for inflation versus unemployment.
Using this index, it has been shown in a forthcoming
thesis of Papademos that, in general, the
optimum policy calls for raising unemployment
at once to a certain critical level and keeping it
there until inflation has substantially abated. The
critical level depends on the nature of the Phillips
curve and the relative weights, but does not
depend significantly on the initial shock-as
long as it is appreciable. To provide an idea of
the order of magnitudes involved, if one relies on
the estimate of the Phillips curve reported in
my joint paper with Papademos (1975), which
is fairly close to vertical and uses Okun's
weights, one finds that (i) at the present time, the
noninflationary rate of unemployment corresponding
to a 2 percent rate of inflation can be
estimated at 5.6 percent, and (ii) the optimal response
to a large exogenous price shock consists
in increasing unemployment from 5.6 to only
about 7 percent. That level is to be maintained
until inflation falls somewhat below 4 percent;
it should then be reduced slowly until inflation
gets to 2.5 (which is estimated to take a couple of
years), and rapidly thereafter. If, on the other
hand, society were to rate inflation twice as
costly as unemployment, the initial unemployment
rate becomes just over 8 percent, though
the path to final equilibrium is then shorter.
These results seem intuitively sensible and quantitatively
reasonable, providing further justification
for the assumed welfare function, with its
appealing property of summarizing preferences
into a single readily understandable number.
One important implication of the nature of the
optimum path described above is that a constant
money growth could not possibly be optimal
while inflation is being squeezed out of the system,
regardless of the relative weights attached
to unemployment and inflation. It would tend
to be prevailingly too small for some initial
period and too large thereafter.
One must thus conclude that the case for a
constant money growth is no more tenable in the
case of supply shocks than it is in the case of
demand shocks.
VI. Conclusion
To summarize, the monetarists have made a
valid and most valuable contribution in establishing
that our economy is far less unstable than
the early Keynesians pictured it and in rehabilitating
the role of money as a determinant of
aggregate demand. They are wrong, however,
in going as far as asserting that the economy is
sufficiently shockproof that stabilization policies
are not needed. They have also made an
important contribution in pointing out that such
policies might in fact prove destabilizing. This
criticism has had a salutary effect on reassessing
what stabilization policies can and should do,
and on trimming down fine-tuning ambitions.
But their contention that postwar fluctuations
resulted from an unstable money growth or that
stabilization policies decreased rather than increased
stability just does not stand up to an
impartial examination of the postwar record of
the United States and other industrialized countries.
Up to 1974, these policies have helped to
keep the economy reasonable stable by historical
standards, even though one can certainly point
to some occasional failures.
The serious deterioration in economic stability
since 1973 must be attributed in the first place
to the novel nature of the shocks that hit us,
namely, supply shocks. Even the best possible
aggregate demand management cannot offset
such shocks without a lot of unemployment
together with a lot of inflation. But, in addition,
demand management was far from the best. This
failure must be attributed in good measure to the
fact that we had little experience or even an
adequate conceptual framework to deal with
such shocks; but at least from my reading of
the record, it was also the result of failure to
use stabilization policies, including too slavish
adherence to the monetarists' constant money