Sciences of the United States, 34 are ES
Fellows. From 1969 to 1990, 30 economics
Nobel awards were made, and 25 of the
laureates are, or were, ES Fellows. Since it
was first presented to Paul Samuelson in
1947, the John Bates Clark medal of the
American Economic Association has been
given to 21 economists, of whom 20 are ES
Fellows; and of the 26 living past presidents
of our Association, 13 are ES Fellows.
One may wish that those counts had not
been made. One may argue about points of
their interpretation. But they belong in our
common knowledge, and their thrust is unequivocal.
They indicate how extensive the
mathematization of economics and how
deep the accompanying change of our field
were over the past five decades.
The perception of the depth of that
change is reinforced by a comparison of the
levels of mathematics required in 1940 and
in 1990 to follow the development of economic
theory in every direction it was taking.
Fifty years ago, basic undergraduate
preparation in mathematics was almost always
sufficient. Today, graduate training in
mathematics is necessary. If, instead of being
a follower, one wishes to be an active
participant in that development along its
most technical avenues, a high degree of
mathematical professionalism is called for.
Several faculty members of the 13 departments
of economics mentioned previously
were actually identified as mathematicians
by their doctorates; four of them served as
chairmen of those departments during the
past 25 years. If still sharper focus brings
out the intellectual leaders of that development,
prominent among them is John von
Neumann, one of the foremost mathematicians
of his generation.

In that development process, mathematical
economics was continuously redefined as
new territories were included within its outward-
moving frontier and as topics that were
once at that frontier became standard parts
of the graduate, if not of the undergraduate,
economic-theory curriculum.
II

Before the contemporary period of the
past five decades, theoretical physics had
been an inaccessible ideal toward which
economic theory sometimes strove. During
that period, this striving became a powerful
stimulus in the mathematization of economic
theory.

The great theories of physics cover an
immense range of phenomena with a
supreme economy of expression. Of this,
James Clerk Maxwell (1865) had given a
notable example, as he described the electromagnetic
field by means of eight equations
at the time when mathematical economics
was born and came of age in the
middle of the 19th century. This extreme
conciseness is made possible by the privileged
relationship that developed over several
centuries between physics and mathematics.
In turn, the former presented the
latter with open problems, or found to questions
raised by physical theory ready-made
answers discovered by mathematicians in
their abstract universe. Sometimes the
causal linkage of research done in each one
of the two fields could not easily be unraveled;
and, on occasion, the same scientist
made inextricably intertwined contributions
to both disciplines.

The benefits of that special relationship
were large for both fields; but physics did
not completely surrender to the embrace of
mathematics and to its inherent compulsion
toward logical rigor. The experimental results
and the factual observations that are at
the basis of physics, and which provide a
constant check on its theoretical constructions,
occasionally led its bold reasonings to
violate knowingly the canons of mathematical
deduction.

In these directions, economic theory could
not follow the role model offered by physical
theory. Next to the most sumptuous
scientific tool of physics, the Superconducting
Super Collider whose construction cost
is estimated to be on the order of $1010
(David P. Hamilton, 1990; see also Science,
5 October 1990), the experiments of economics
look excessively frugal. Being denied
a sufficiently secure experimental base, economic
theory has to adhere to the rules of
logical discourse and must renounce the
facility of internal inconsistency. A deductive
structure that tolerates a contradiction
does so under the penalty of being useless,