wealth, make people more choosy about
jobs, more inclined to quit and to wait?
Or less choosy, more inclined to stay in
the job they have or to take the first one
that comes along? I should have thought
more selective rather than less. But natural
rate theory must take the opposite
view if it is to explain why under-estimation
of price inflation bamboozles workers
into holding or taking jobs that they do
not reallv want.
Another form of alleged inflation illusion
refers to wages rather than prices.
Workers are myopic anl (1o not perceive
that wages elsewhere are, or soon will be,
rising as fast as the money wage of the
job they now hold or have just found.
Consequently they under-estimate the
advantages of quitting and searching.
This explanationi is convincing only to the
extent that the payoff to search activity
is determined by wage differentials. The
payoff also depends on the probabilities of
getting jobs at quoted wages, therefore on
the balance between vacancies and job
seekers. Workers know that perfectly well.
Quit rates are an index of volunitary
search activity. They do not diminish
when unemployment is low and wage
rates are rapidly rising. They increase,
quite understandably. This fact contradicts
the inflation illusion story, both
versions. 1 conclude that it is not possible
to regard fluctuations of unemployment
on either side of the zero-inflation rate as
mainly voluntary, albeit mistaken, extensions
and contractions of search activity.
The new microeconomics of job search
(see Edmund Phelps et al.), is nevertheless
a valuable contribution to understanding
of frictional unemployment. It
provides reasons why some unemployment
is voluntary, and why some unemployment
is socially efficient.
Does the market produce the optimal
amount of search unemployment? Is the
natural rate optimal? I do not believe the
new microeconomics has yet answered
these questions.
An omniscient and beneficent economic
dictator would not place every new job
seeker immediately in any job at hand.
Such a policy would create many mismatches,
sacrificing efficiency in production
or necessitating costly job-to-job shifts later
on. The hypothetical planner would prefer
to keep a queue of workers unemployed,
so that he would have a larger choice of
jobs to which to assign them. But he would
not make the queue too long, because
workers in the queue are not producing
anything.
Of course he could shorten the queue of
unemployed if he could dispose of more
jobs and lengthen the queue of vacancies.
With enough jobs of various kinds, he
would never lack a vacancy for which any
worker who happens to come along has
comparative advantage. But because of
limited capital stocks and interdependence
among skills, jobs cannot be indefinitely
multiplied without lowering their marginal
productivity. Our wise and benevolent
planner would not place people in jobs
yielding less than the marginal value of
leisure. Given this constraint on the
number of jobs, he would always have to
keep some workers waiting, and some jobs
vacant. But he certainly would be inefficient
if he had fewer jobs, filled and
vacant, than this constraint. This is the
common sense of Beveridge's rule-that
vacancies should not be less than unemployment.

Is the natural rate a market solution of
the hypothetical planner's operations research
problem?/ According to search
theory, an unemployed worker considers
the probabilities that he can get a better
job by searching longer and balances the
expected discounted value of waiting
against the loss of earnings. The employed
worker makes a similar calculation when
he considers quitting, also taking into ac-