fruit in the same future year t will tend
to give rise to the same discount factor
I t

dt + )

where rt is the annual discount rate applicable
to the period from year zero to year
t. The usual practice in cost-benefit analyses
is to assume also that rt is independent of
t, rt = r, say.

This reasoning simply registers the economic
accounting implications of assumed
intertemporal efficiency with capital nonsaturation.
To many highly educated

people, there is something ethically offensive
about it.

A difficult practical problem on which
economists still differ among themselves is
how to read a good estimate for r from
capital market and other data. Different tax
rates on corporate and individual incomes
complicate the problem. Considering this
and various market imperfections, the precluded
alternative use of funds drawn upon
for a public project also enters into the
choice of r. I will not venture into these
questions here.

Coming back to helium storage, the discounting
criterion would lead most economists
to recommend that those steps of the
storage program be implemented for which
the rate of return on the total investment
(not that on energy alone) exceeds or equals
the discount rate appropriate to the problem.
Step i, storing helium currently vented,
is likely to meet the test. The problem is to
estimate which of the four or six steps
would.

Two final remarks, the first added as an
afterthought since August 30.
The two issues we have discussedwhether
to count only energy costs or all
costs, and whether or not to discount future
benefits and costs-are logically distinct
implications of the notion of intertemporal
equilibrium. However, psychologically they
are related. If one counts only energy costs,
everything is expressible in equivalent
Btu's, and to the physicist, steeped in the
law of conservation of energy, Btu's are the
same everywhere and at all times. To discount
future Btu's therefore seems not just
strange but outright wrong. So it is. But the
economist does not discount quantities of
any kind. He discounts only real values,
that is, quantities (including energy) multiplied
by real prices that reflect the expected
balance of cost and preference as of a
specified future time and beyond. It is to
these prices that the discount factor is applied.
I am hoping that this simple distinction
may help to reduce misunderstanding
between the professions.

Secondly, our reasoning has proceeded
blandly as if there were no uncertainty about
the outcome of the development of processes
expected to be substantial users of helium.
If there is considerable uncertainty, economists
may want to add an allowance for risk
to the discount rate. They may also wish to
experiment with models in which judgmental
probabilities are attached to these
uncertain outcomes. This device may produce
insights even if the conclusions depend
on admittedly uncertain premises. A
study of this kind is included as chapter IV
in the MRG report.

V. Attaching Values to Health and Life
The question of estimating the value of
health and the value of life arises mostly in
contexts where either public decisions, or
public monitoring of private decisions, can
be shaped so as to improve health and prolong
life. One example is the investment of
public funds to diminish physical risks to
traffic by the design of roads, bridges, turnouts,
and crossings. Another is regular expenditures
for traffic police, building inspectors,
and other law enforcers who
restrain some people from killing or hurting
themselves or others by recklessness or
neglect.

A common trait of these decisions is that
from good experience records one may be
able to estimate the years of lives saved,
perhaps also of health and limbs preserved,
per dollar spent on efficiently run projects
or activities of this kind. Such calculations
make it possible to spot discrepancies between
different projects in regard to "health