THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
comparing two mandatory programs, one with
lump-sum payments and one with annuities.
This comparison would be easy if individual
choices between annuitization and nonannuitization
were unaffected by the government
choice. Then one would simply compare the
implicit price of the trade-off between annuities
and lump sums in the alternative mandatory
programs with the explicit price at which
individuals could make transactions. For example,
if everyone annuitized and the market
had a single price for all annuities, then we
would compare the price implicit in the comparison
of the programs with the actual uniform
price. In this case, we would find
mandatory annuitization attractive because
the government would be likely to have a
better price than the market.26 Conversely, if
everyone would purchase life insurance to
undo a mandatory annuity (and rates were
uniform), then we would find mandated annuities
unattractive since the private market
price for life insurance would likely be larger
than the implicit price if the government
switched from annuities to lump sums.
The story becomes a little more complicated
if we assume that everyone annuitizes
and the market would offer different prices to
different people. This might happen with a
mandate to purchase annuities in the private
market if the market had some degree of price
diversity by risk class.27 Then, in addition to
the difference from the average price with and
without the government annuity, we would
note the differences in prices for different
people. Relative to annuities priced differently
for different groups, the uniform
annuitization implicit in the mandated annuitization
would favor those with longer expected
lives-women relative to men, male
high earners relative to male low earners,
female high earners relative to female low
earners. A progressive benefit formula can be
26W. H. Beveridge (1942) argued that in the United
Kingdom the government systematically did better than
private insurance markets.
27 Annuity pricing that varies with stochastic health out-
comes implies a risk of the classification to which one will
belong. With annuitization done at a single time in life, the
degree of risk classification involves a tension between
providing more insurance and providing more accurate labor
market incentives.
used to offset the systematic variation in life
expectancy with earnings within genders.
For this or any income distribution comparison,
we must have a counterfactual, preferably
a plausible one. Without a mandate, the
relevant counterfactual is that approximately
no one would annuitize. Pretty much everyone
would lose the insurance gains from annuitization.
28 We can compare the mandate
with this counterfactual in two steps-first the
value of annuitization assuming actuarially
fair pricing and then the difference, described
above, between fair and uniform pricing.
Since those groups with shorter life expectancies
have more to gain from fair annuitization
[assuming CRRA preferences in the
usual range and realistic mortality rates (Jeffrey
Brown, 2003)] this counterfactual shows
much less diversity in the utility value of
annuitization than the previous comparison.29
Indeed, Brown finds that the utility value of
annuitization (relative to wealth) is similar for
groups divided by gender, race, and education.
Thus the differences in expected payments
from different life expectancies have
less distributional impact in utility terms than
in expected payment calculations.30
281 ignore the role of access to minimum income guar-
antees (SSI).
29 Someone with a higher probability of dying would
find a larger decrease in the price of consumption when
going from unconditional purchase to purchase conditional
on being alive with fair pricing. Without annuitization,
someone with a higher probability of dying would generally
consume less in later years, ceteris paribus, and so have less
consumption on which to receive a price decrease. Given
the preference structure in Brown, the net result of these two
effects is that those with shorter lives gain more from fair
annuitization, tending to offset the redistribution from a
change from fair to uniform annuity pricing. Interpretation
of the Brown analysis of the total impact of annuitization is
aided by the analysis in Bernheim (1987) of the valuation of
marginal annuitization relative to life expectancy and li-
quidity constraints.
30 Implicitly this income distribution discussion has as-
sumed rational lifetime consumption allocation-the only
behavioral element being an unexplained, and unexplain-
able (on rational grounds), failure to purchase annuities.
Similarly, the simulations showing the value of annuiti-
zation assume optimal consumption paths both with and
without annuitization. Any full normative evaluation of
annuitization should reflect the fact that those living
longer after retirement will have a larger marginal utility
of consumption for any given wealth for retirement
consumption.
MARCH 2004
8