intervention, such as infant industry protec-
tion, can be called for.
The problem with the argument, as a basis
for policy, is that it fails to provide any guid-
ance as to how to distinguish between an infant
that will grow up and a would-be producer
seeking protection because it is privately prof-
itable. It is not even clear how one could begin,
empirically, to identify the domain of the
externality. Moreover, even if there were a
producer or producers whose increased pro-
duction would generate dynamic externalities,
it does not follow that any level of protection
is warranted. And there is nothing in the infant
industry argument to provide guidance for
quantifying or estimating the likely magnitude
of the externality.
Indiscriminate protection in developing
countries was defended on infant industry
grounds with arguments of capital market fail-
ure, labor market failure (as the costs of train-
ing, presumably, would be borne by first
entrants into industries and then not recouped
as others hired workers away), costs of in-
vestments in technology, and uncertainty all
used. It was not until Baldwin's (1969) sem-
inal article that it was demonstrated that, even
when the presumed imperfection existed, it
was unlikely that infant industry protection
would help correct it. As Baldwin cogently ar-
gued, later entrants to an industry might speed
up their investments if protection made do-
mestic production more profitable, and the first
entrant might even be worse off! It was only
after critical examination of these circum-
stances that the defenders of the infant indus-
try case for import substitution became less
vehement.
The infant industry argument also is an
excellent example of a theory that is nonoper-
ational because criteria for bureaucrats to iden-
tify cases have not been put forward. Quite
aside from the unpredictability and immeasur-
ability of the future time path of costs in new
factories and the moral hazard associated with
asking individual entrepreneurs to indicate
how much protection they need, there is noth-
ing to my knowledge in the literature speci-
fying how the policy maker might instruct a
bureaucrat to identify (much less measure) a
dynamic externality if it were present, how an
incentive-compatible mechanism might be de-
vised for improving welfare, how the bureau-
crat might measure the height of warranted
protection, nor how policy makers might cred-
ibly commit to temporary protection. Even ex
post, it is not entirely clear how one might
identify an industry as a successful infant: sim-
ply because a firm became profitable and ex-
ported does not prove that there was either an
externality or a dynamic process at work! 9
B. Negative Results
Much of the theorizing that took place was
concerned with what I call "negative results."
That is, analysts sought to find reasons why,
for example, an exception to free trade should
be made. Once the principle of comparative
advantage was laid down as a basis for policy,
there was little left for theorists to prove sup-
porting an open trading system, so the chal-
lenge to theorists was to find conditions under
which the free trade precept did not hold. As
theory, these findings were significant, but for
policy they were unhelpful, and probably
served to perpetuate inappropriate policies.
In most real-world circumstances, one
strongly suspects that protection exists where
theoretical exceptions do not justify it, and that
moves to first-best policies would on average
lower, and not raise, protection. Judged by that
metric, research output relevant for policy
would consist more of attempts to measure the
costs of these excess levels of protection. In
practice, it would be interesting to review the
literature and ascertain how many articles, or
pages, or other measures of research output
were devoted to finding exceptions to the
proposition that comparative advantage should
form the basis for trade policy, contrasted with
those focussing on circumstances where pro-
tection was too high! In undergraduate inter-