capita GNP we might have achieved by 2050
we would achieve only in 2051. Considering
that in most of the developed countries-the
United States, Japan, France, the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Israel-the
agricultural problem has been protecting
farmers, that agricultural productivity in
most parts of the world continues to improve,
and that many crops and cultivated
plants will benefit directly from enhanced
photosynthesis due to increased carbon
dioxide, one cannot be certain that the net
impact on agricultural productivity will be
negative or, if negative, will be noticed in
the developed world.
I conclude that in the United States, and
probably Japan, Western Europe, and other
developed countries, the impact on economic
output will be negligible and unlikely
to be noticed.2 And there is no reason to
believe that in these countries there could
be a noticeable impact on health. Any influence
of climate on health in this country
would be more in the regional distribution
of the population than in changes in local
and regional climates.
Comfort is worth considering. Fortunately,
the climate models predict a greater
warming in winter than in summer. Most
people in the United States, Japan, and
Western Europe go south for vacation, both
summer and winter; and when people move
upon retiring in the United States they typically
move toward warmer climates. In future
years, elderly people may suffer more
heat stroke in summer in St. Louis, but we
can hope for fewer broken bones from ice
in Boston. (Inhaling air richer in carbon
dioxide has no effect on health.)
IV
This complacent assessment cannot be
extended to the much larger population of
the underdeveloped world. The livelihoods
earned in agriculture and other climatesensitive
outdoor activities, 3 percent in the
United States, comprise 30 percent and
more of all livelihoods in most of the developing
world. Reliable forecasts of likely
climate changes in the different areas so
dependent on agriculture are simply not
available, so no assessment, region by region,
of the effect on productivity can be
provided. There is no strong presumption
that the climates prevailing in different regions
50 or 100 years from now will be less
conducive to food production. But there is
also no assurance that climate changes will
not be harmful, and even if on balance the
impact is neutral, there may be large areas
with large populations that suffer severely.
Those people are vulnerable in a way that
Americans, Western Europeans, and
Japanese are not.
Nor can the impact on health be dismissed
or readily subsumed among generally
improving health conditions, as for the
developed world. Numerous parasitic and
other vector-borne diseases affecting hundreds
of millions of people are sensitive to
climate. Again, there is no strong presumption
that malaria mosquitos, to take an example,
will on balance benefit from climate
changes, but the risk is there.
It is with the less-developed countries that
we have to be most careful about superimposing
the climates of the future on the
economies and societies of today. As it was
in our own country during this century, the
trend in developing countries is to be less
dependent on agriculture and less vulnerable
to climate in transportation and other
activities and health. If per capita income
growth in the next 40 years compares with
the 40 years just past, vulnerability to climate
change should diminish, and the resources
available for adaptation should be
greater. I say this not to minimize concern
about climate change, but to anticipate the
question of whether developing countries
should make sacrifices in their development
to minimize the emission of gases that may
change climate to their disadvantage. Their
best defense against climate change may be
their own continued development.
This is a point worth emphasizing. Some
environmentalists argue that developing