these are so limited in their coverage of
future goods transactions. There are forward
contracts in money, some commodities,
real estate, but very little else.
The explanation lies in uncertainties of
both buyers and sellers about prices and
quantities and about technology and
tastes. Using uncertainties about prices
and quantities as an explanation for market
failure is a circular argument, though
not necessarily a fallacy. That is, if all
markets for future goods existed and
cleared all transactions, then there would
be no price-quantity uncertainties. But
this much is true; if some markets for future
goods do not exist, then the agents
have uncertainties which are relevant to
their behavior on markets for complementary
or substitute goods. As Hicks showed
a long time ago, complementarity and substitution
can occur over time as well as
simultaneously. If, as I will argue in a
minute, uncertainty can tend to destroy
markets, then we can conclude that the
absence of some markets for future goods
may cause others to fail.
To illustrate, the demand for capital
goods at any point of time is dependent on
the prices and sales of the product at future
points of time. Therefore the demand
for future capital goods will depend on expectations
about the product at some still
more removed time. If we assume only
that we will not have markets for products
at some distant point of time, then the
resulting uncertainty will reflect itself in a
failure of the market for capital goods in
the nearer future, which will in turn create
still further uncertainties.
Thus, if some markets for future goods
are nonexistent, there will be uncertainties
on the other markets; in addition, demand
and supply conditions for the future are
uncertain because of technological and
taste shifts. Assume that both buyers and
sellers are risk averters. Then without
going into details it is reasonable to conclude
that both demand and supply will
have a downward bias as compared with
the situation in which uncertainty is absent.
A buyer will be unwilling to contract
for purchase of a good if a superior or
cheaper substitute may be available; and
the seller will be unwilling to accept a
price sufficiently low to be suitable to the
buyer, particularly if he thereby precludes
himself from a possible opportunity to
shift his resources to other closely related
goods. It would seem possible, at least,
that there will be no price at which transactions
in future goods will take place.
From a theoretical viewpoint, one might
say that the market is in a strange sort of
equilibrium; there is some shadowy sort of
price at which supply and demand are
equated at zero. But this price is not performing
much of a signalling function.
There is one ultra-neoclassical approach
to the market treatment of uncertainties,
in which I take some pride. That is the notion
of a contingent market. Instead of
letting uncertainty ruin existing markets,
we can take it explicitly into account by
buying and selling commitments to be
carried out only if some uncertain event
occurs. We could in principle imagine
agreements to transact which will hold if
and only a given conceivable technological
innovation does not take place, with a
second market for transactions valid if the
innovation does take place. Then we can
restore the possibility of markets.
Such contingent markets are not entirely
unknown; insurance contracts are
the purest example, and equity markets
and cost-plus contracts provide more
muddied illustrations. But they are relatively
rare. Why this should be so follows
again from the general problem of informatioin
costs and dispersal. If contracts are
contingent on the occurrence of some
event, then it must be verified whether or
not the event occurre(l. But this is information,
an(I as the example of a technological