one of the important reasons for Chile's continued,
very impressive economic performance.
And it is important, also, in the context
of this paper. Living in a world in which real
cost reductions are a key dynamic force producing
economic growth, we must look to the
motivations and preoccupations of those who
take the critical decisions at the level of the
firm. For these decisions, it is not only important
that the policy framework be good now;
the expectation that it will stay good in the
future is also important. Otherwise, investments
will tend to be limited to those with
short horizons and payment periods, and much
soil, fertile with longer-term economic opportunities,
will go unplowed.
VI. A Vision of the Growth Process
Let me now try to summarize my own vision
of the growth process-the major elements
of which have been presented here. In
the first place we have the five standard pillars
of growth-the rate of increase in the labor
force, the rate of increase in the stock of human
capital, the increase in the capital stock
(net investment as a fraction of value added),
the rate of return which that investment will
yield (or can be expected to yield) and, last
but not least, real cost reductions stemming
from 1001 different sources.
Commenting on these in turn, I would note
that increases in the labor force have taken on
new meaning in many countries as labor force
participation rates (particularly those of
women) have increased. Whereas with a constant
participation rate, the growth rate of the
labor force is just a proxy for the growth rate
of population, important increases in labor
force participation can lead, just by themselves,
to significant increases in measured
real income per head.
Concerning increases in the stock of human
capital, my conviction is that most of their
contribution to growth is, on the whole, well
measured by market wages, as in the expression
XiwiALi. This does not deny the existence
of externalities due to an increased
human capital stock; it simply judges their influence
on the growth rate to be modest in
comparison with the effects of education,
training, learning-by-doing, etc., that can be
(and typically are) internalized by those who
receive them. We therefore look for the effects
of human capital accumulation mainly in the
term YjwjALj, and only (via externalities) as
one of many elements underlying the growth
residual R'.
The rate of investment is a veteran on the
stage of growth analysis. What I would emphasize
here is the importance of maintaining
a clear separation between the rate of investment
and the rate of saving. Models (like
those of the representative consumer) in
which saving and investment are always
equal are not much use even for analysis at
the national level in our modern, interdependent
world. They are even less useful as
one goes down to smaller geographical
regions, and simply cease to make sense as
one studies the growth process at the levels
of the industry and the firm.
The rate of return to investment has in
many ways been the orphan of our growth
analysis, having been masked from view by
our typical representation of capital's contribution
to the growth rate as Sk (AK/K). Here
the rate of return (p + 6) is totally hidden
from view. I deeply urge that more of us get
into the habit of representing this same term
as (p + 6)(AKIy). I want to see more attention
paid to the rate of return because it plays
such a central role in the motivation of economic
agents, and also because changes in it
are such an important element in understanding
and explaining the growth residual, R'.
Table 3 helps explain why I feel this way.
This table is adapted from Harald Beyer's
(1996) work. He carried out an analysis of
the growth experiences of 32 countries ranging
from Sri Lanka to the United States on
the income scale, and from Iceland to Australia
on the geographic scale. In Table 3 we
present results for his ten countries with the
highest and for his ten countries with the lowest
GDP growth rates from 1971-1991. In the
second column the calculated average annual
rate of return is shown. In the third column
we have capital's contribution to the growth
rate [z (p + 6) (AKly) ], and in the final column
the estimated average annual rate of TFP
growth, all over the same time period.
Table 3 shows an unequivocal tendency for
fast-growing countnes to be experiencing high
rates of return as well as high capital contributions
and high rates of TFP improvement.