supplemented by constraints on the supply
side, especially with respect to technology and
the specialty mix of physicians.
In 1995 Americans spent about $1 trillion
for health care, broadly defined. If, during the
past 30 years, health care spending had grown
at the rate of the rest of the economy, the
health care bill in 1995 would have been only
a little more than $400 billion. What accounts
for this extraordinary excess of almost $600
billion in annual spending? There has been a
small increase in physician visits per capita,
but use of acute care hospitals has decreased
sharply. Patient-days per 1000 population are
less than three fifths the level of 30 years ago.
By far the most important factor accounting
for the increase in health care's share of the
GDP is the change in technology.50 Physician
visits and hospital-days cost more than they
used to because the content has changed-the
technologies used for diagnosis and treatment
are more expensive than in the past. Much of
this technological change is welcome; it contributes
to enhancing the length and quality of
life. Some of the change is less desirable because
it adds more to cost than to patient benefit.
Unfortunately, there is great uncertainty
regarding the merits of many technologies.
Moreover, even when the advantages and disadvantages
are known, there are often significant
barriers facing physicians who would
like to practice in a cost-effective manner.
To deal with this problem, I propose the creation
of a large, private center for technology
assessment. Financing for this center would
come from a small levy (less than one tenth of
1 percent) on all health care spending. A centralized
approach is necessary, because health
care is highly fragmented. Individual physicians
and health plans lack the incentive and
ability to commit the resources needed to assess
-new technologies. Even the largest insurance
companies individually account for only
a small percentage of the health care market;
they are, therefore, understandably reluctant to
pay for large-scale assessments that would
benefit all.51 Government agencies try to fill
the void, but the scale of effort is too small,
and a private center would be able to avoid the
political interference that often intrudes on
government-run agencies.52 Health care providers
would fund and set the agenda for the
center, much as the electric power companies
do for the Electric Power Research Institute.
This institute is financed by a small levy on
every public utility bill.
A health care technology assessment center
would have two primary functions. First, it
would help to develop and disseminate systematic
knowledge about the cost-effectiveness of
medical technology through support of research
and through a comprehensive program of
publications and conferences. The center would
have some intramural research capability, but
most of the research would be conducted extramurally
at medical schools, hospitals, and research
institutes throughout the country. It would
provide health professionals with essential information
to evaluate and improve their clinical
practices and offer a rational basis for deciding
what services should be included in the basic
plan.

The second important function would be to
provide legitimacy for the cost-effective practice
of medicine. Currently, many directors of
health plans and many individual physicians
know they could be practicing in a more costeffective
way, but they are inhibited from doing
so because they do not practice in a
vacuum. Physicians are influenced by peers
who have been trained in settings that emphasized
the use of the latest technologies regardless
of cost. Patients come with particular sets
of expectations based on what they read or
hear in the media and what their relatives and
friends tell them has been their experience.
The threat of malpractice suits lurks in the
background. A major function of the center