tem and the enriched economics of fiscal
federalism. I have even eschewed an assessment
of revenue sharing, the rationale
and form of which were developed by
economists. With little imperialism, economists
can also cite the firm quantitative
evidence being developed to demonstrate
the adverse economic effects of many public
regulatory activities.4
For all the advances, the agenda of unresolved
conceptual questions and unfinished
empirical business is huge. But
even this truncated review of progress
and current output in public economics
makes clear that the contributions of
recent decades have enormously enriched
this field not only conceptually but as a
source of hard practical advice to decision
makers who want to shape a better tax
system, do justice to the poor, improve
social programs, reform budget procedures,
fight unemployment, and so on. And in the
process, the frontiers of normative economics,
both theoretical and empirical,
have been pushed out into the areas of
education, health, racism, crime, family
behavior, and even political behavior.
As a result, we have plunged ever deeper
into the realm of values. Not that it was
a value-free inquiry to ask the traditional
questions about the effect of a given policy
on material output. But surely the testing
of policies by the costs they incur and how
effective they are in meeting some generally
accepted criteria of social welfare or
general welfare involves economics directly
in value and distributional problems.
Aid it enables economics to say important
things on social policy issues within the
framework of the conventional economic
paradigm and with rigor of the non-mortis
variety.
We are becoming interdisciplinary in
spite of ourselves. When we do it, of course,
we don't think of it as cross-sterilization
of disciplines. But here is an area where
modesty becomes us. For if we confine
ourselves too narrowly to economics, we
are far too likely to attribute to economic
variables the behavior and results that are
really a response to social variables. Fearing
just that, one observer has been unkind
enough to suggest that we ought to
stick to inflation problems where we all
know what to say.
V. The Economist and Inflation
Inflation may no longer be "Public
Enemy Number One" now that severe recession
is upon us, but it is surely "Economists'
Enemy Number One." Among the
charges of, by, and against economists
that have been touched off by doubledigit
inflation and reported in the public
prints are these:
Economists have confessed (I plead
guilty) that 1973 was "the year of infamy
in inflation forecasting" and, as
already noted, that "we were caught
with our parameters down."
Aaron Gordon puts it more explicitly
when he says that "the forecasters fell
flat on their faces in predicting price
changes because they didn't have any
way of estimating sectoral supply scarcity"
and adds that we have not "even
started to develop a theory of aggregate
supply."
Leontief scolds macroeconomists more
generally: "There is a lot of fancy methodology,
but the macroeconomists get
indigestion if you give them facts."