thought, and the models demonstrate, that
the greater the change in average temperature
the greater the departure of current
climates from what they are now. Thus,
while it is wrong to think that what is going
to happen can be readily characterized as
"warming" it is not erroneous to take that
average warming as a rough measure of the
extent or severity of change to be expected.
Unfortunately the widespread reference to
"global warming" promotes the notion that
things will simply get hotter. (Interestingly,
virtually all public discussion is on hotter
summers, not warmer winters; a hundred
years ago popular discussion of a warming
trend would likely have concentrated on the
milder winters to be expected.)
If three degrees Celsius is taken as an
index of climate change to come within the
next century or so, how big is that compared
with what has happened within the last century,
or the last 10,000 years? From what I
have just said, this cannot be answered in
terms of whether anyone would notice the
difference if every night and every morning,
every winter and every summer, temperatures
were exactly three degrees higher than
they otherwise would have been. The question
is: how would a three-degree change in
a global average compare with what has
been experienced in the past?
The answer is that for 10,000 years, since
the disappearance of the last ice age, average
temperature appears never to have varied
over anything like three degrees. A band
of one degree Celsius would cover the current
estimates of what average temperatures
have been since the dawn of recorded
history. We will be moving into a climatic
regime that has never been experienced in
the current interglacial period.
"Mankind will undergo greater climate
change in the next 100 years than has been
experienced in the last 10,000." Properly
qualified, the statement is true; what it neglects
is that peoples have been migrating
over great distances for at least several
thousand years. Goths and Vandals, Huns,
West Europeans who populated North and
South America, Southerners who went
North during the Great Depression, and
Northeasterners who moved southwest after
World War II all experienced changes in
climate greater than any being forecast by
the models. Almost everybody who attends
this lecture in New Orleans will have undergone
a greater change in the past few days
than is expected to occur in any fixed locality
during the coming century.
The changes that the models produce are
gradual both in time and in space. The
models do not produce discontinuities. Climates
will "migrate" slowly. The climate
of Kansas may become like Oklahoma's,
Nebraska's like that of Kansas, South
Dakota's like Nebraska's, but none of these
is expected to become like the climates of
Oregon, Louisiana, or Massachusetts.
A caution: the models probably cannot
project discontinuities-just gradual change
-because nothing goes into the models that
will produce catastrophes. There may be
phenomena that could produce drastic
change, but they are not known with enough
confidence to introduce them into the models.
So the reassuring gradualness may be
an artifact of the methodology. I will return
to this point later.
This greenhouse problem, if problem it
proves to be, is truly one of the "global
common." A ton of carbon emitted anywhere
on earth has the same effect as a ton
emitted anywhere else. And carbon dioxide
has a long residence time in the atmosphere:
a century or more. There may be
ways to remove it, but it doesn't disappear.
The greenhouse influence on any national
territory depends solely on the global concentration,
not in any way on what part of
the total is due to a nation's own emissions.
As I shall detail later, the costs of reducing
carbon emissions will be large compared
with any other emissions that have caused
concern. The costs of phasing out CFC's
will be in the billions of dollars per year for
some years, and complete elimination is expected
to be feasible. The cost of reducing
sulfuric acid may be in the tens of billions of
dollars. Proposals to hold emissions of carbon
dioxide constant (with a linear increase
of concentration in perpetuity) or to reduce
emissions by 50 percent below what they