extracting helium from the atmosphere are
about 1,000 times those for extracting it
from natural gas containing .3 to .5 percent
of helium. Large as that figure is, I shall describe
later the economist's case (Section
III) for including in the calculation inputs
other than energy, such as that for plant
and equipment, and (Section IV) for taking
into account that the costs of all kinds in
any required future extraction from the atmosphere
will not be incurred until much
later.
In fact, one statement in the report reads
as a rejection of the idea that the time at
which capital cost is incurred is at all pertinent.
In a description of the possible role
of the government in implementing the five
steps, the report says: "The burden of the
discount rate as a criterion of performance
could be eliminated and the present debt to
the U.S. Treasury written off' (p. 38). I
shall explain in Section IV why I think not
many economists will support the proposal
to eliminate the criterion of the discount
rate. Meanwhile, the statement leads one to
infer that the capital cost component is not
negligible as a factor in the decision.
II. Technology Mixes of Future
Energy Supply and Use
My second illustration is a study that was
carried out as an input to the deliberations
of the Committee on Nuclear and Alternative
Energy Systems (CONAES, in short),
and of its Synthesis Panel. It is entitled
"Energy Modeling for an Uncertain Future.
" As explained in the preface, it is a
"supporting paper" published without having
gone through the customary report review
procedure of the Academy. While for
the other illustrations I have not named
authors or committee chairpersons, I
should not conceal that I was the chairman
of the group, called the Modeling Resource
Group (MRG), which collectively did the
work described in its Report. The group
consisted mostly of economists and operations
researchers, two somewhat like-minded
professions. My comments on interdisciplinary
interactions about the ideas and
findings of the group will therefore draw
on discussions with members of other professions
within and outside CONA ES.
For that purpose it may suffice to give
only the briefest description of the questions
addressed, the assumptions made, and
the methods used. One important question
arises from the fact that several competing
objectives enter into the choice of a longrun
energy technology mix. The net economic
effect (economic benefit minus cost)
of the development of a given technology
mix can be estimated in a crude way, as suggested
in Table 1, column (a), by its effect
on the Gross National Product (GNP). In
addition, one will also want to register risks
of adverse effects such as mining accidents,
air pollution, acid rain, oil spills, possible
leakage from nuclear waste disposal, or diversion
or proliferation of weapons-grade
nuclear materials. For brevity, all such effects
will be called "environmental" effects.
The place in Table 1 for these impacts is
column (b), tersely dubbed "health and
life."
The Risk/Impact Panel of CONAES decided
not to try to estimate money equivalents
for such adverse impacts of various
magnitudes. Were such estimates possible
and available, then one could also define
and find a balance between desired benefits
and adverse "environmental" impacts that
remain after scrubbers, inspectors, Civex
and the like have done their jobs. Not having
such estimates, the MRG turned the
question around: Assume that tentatively
chosen upper bounds are imposed on the
use of technologies that have such impacts.
Estimate the loss in GNP associated with
these bounds. Then that number also places
a price tag on the reduction in "environmental"
impacts achieved by those bounds.
Thus, even if an a priori valuation of the
reduction in impacts is not available, then
such a valuation is still implicit in any
decision actually taken. It may help the
decision makers to know these implicit
price tags.
I will list only the principal assumptions
made for this purpose. Numerical values
were assigned to three sets of variables. As