wrote this (now escaped from economics and
teaching international law at a leading university)
had come from Cambridge University
and a course with Harry Johnson. We
go beyond this simple statement today in
saying that nations are groups of people with
common tastes in public goods (Richard
Cooper, 1977). Geography discriminates between
countries, as a hypothetical customs
union between Iceland and New Zealand
would demonstrate, and so do governments.
Behind and alongside of governments, people
discriminate.

Public goods, let me remind you, are that
class of goods like public works where exclusion
of consumers may be impossible, but in
any event consumption of the good by one
consuming unit-short of some level approaching
congestion-does not exhaust its
availability for others. They are typically
underproduced-not, I believe, for the Galbraithian
reason that private goods are advertized
and public goods are not-but because
the consumer who has access to the
good anyhow has little reason to vote the
taxes, or pay his or her appropriate share.
Unless the consumer is a highly moral person,
following the Kantian Categorical Imperative
of acting in ways which can be
generalized, he or she is apt to be a "free
rider." The tendency for public goods to be
underproduced is serious enough within a
nation bound by some sort of social contract,
and directed in public matters by a
government with the power to impose and
collect taxes. It is, I propose to argue in due
course, a more serious problem in international
political and economic relations in the
absence of international government.
Adam Smith's list of public goods was
limited to national defense, law and order,
and public works that it would not pay individuals
to produce for themselves. Most
economists are prepared now to extend the
list to include stabilization, regulation, and
income redistribution (Cooper, 1977), even
nationalism (Albert Breton, 1964), and standards
that reduce transaction costs, including
weights and measures, language, and
money. Public goods were popular a decade
ago. There is something of a tendency today,
at least in political science, to draw back and
claim that such institutions as open world
markets are not public goods because countries
can be excluded from them by discrimination.
One monetarist goes so far as to
maintain that money is not a public good,
arguing, I believe, from the store-of-value
function where possession by one individual
denies possession by others, rather than from
the unit-of-account function in which exclusion
is impossible and exhaustion does not
hold (Roland Vaubel, 1984).
II

Before addressing international public
goods, I want to digress to suggest that there
are other limits to the imperialist claims of
economics. Social goods are not traded in
markets, for example-honor, respect, dignity,
love. In his address to the Columbia
University Bicentennial Assembly, Sir Dennis
Robertson asserted that what economists
economize is love (1955, pp. 5-6). Michael
Walzer (1983, pp. 101-02) has compiled a
list of " things" that contemporary moral
philosophy will not tolerate being bought
and sold: human beings, political power,
criminal justice, freedom of expression, marriage
and procreation rights (pace Becker),
the right to leave the political community,
exemptions from military service and jury
duty, political office, basic services like police
protection, desperate exchanges such as
permission for women and children to
work fourteen hours a day, prizes and honors,
love and friendship, criminally noxious substances
such as heroin. The inclusion of a
number of items on the list is debatable, and
history reveals that most of them have been
traded on occasion in some cultures. The
market, moreover, strikes two lawyers as a
dubious device for making "tragic choices,"
like those in which scarcity confronts humanistic
moral values, for example, allocating
food in famine, children available for adoption,
or organ transplants (Guido Calabrese
and Philip Bobbit, 1978). It is difficult to
dissent from Walzers's conclusion that a
radically laissez-faire economy would be like
a totalitarian state, treating every social good
as if it were a commodity (1983, p. 119).
There is, moreover, a similar remark from a