mal, long-term, market-clearing level, taking
account of storage costs and interest, and
appropriately discounted for uncertainty. Indeed,
it was precisely in the context of reasoning
about markets for storable individual
commodities (and agricultural commodities
in particular) that John Muth first presented
the concept that he called "rational expectations"
. ' In this particular microeconomic
context there can surely be no valid objection
to rational expectations. But we must
not forget that the primary way in which
expectations- rational or otherwise-affect
current prices is precisely through affecting
behavior with respect to inventories, along
with sales or purchases for future delivery
(i.e., negative inventories) or through affecting
some other form of intertemporal substitution
between, for example, labor and
leisure, now and in the future.2
Markets for commodities, of course, vary
widely in the extent to which inventories are
able to stabilize price or consumption. At the
one extreme is the traditional market for
fresh flowers. Holding inventories is, by definition,
impossible. Random fluctuations in
the production of or the demand for fresh
flowers are thus fully reflected in daily prices.
And because the immediate response of
amounts supplied to price changes is zero, by
definition, and the response of amounts demanded
to price is relatively small, price
fluctuations in fresh flowers may be substantial.
Inventories cannot supplement
below-normal current production; nor can
inventories be accumulated to profit from a
below-normal current price or from an
expected above-normal future price.
At the opposite extreme are the markets
for the durable products of agriculture and
mining-for example, for wheat or tin. Here
storage costs are relatively low, and inventories
may easily reach the equivalent of one or
even several years' production. Under such
circumstances, it is not implausible to argue
that rational expectations and inventory
adjustments tend to stabilize prices and consumption
in the presence of random fluctuations
in supply or demand.3 On the other
hand, durable or " permanent" changes in
supply or demand alter the equilibrium price,
and, almost at once, the actual market price
begins to reflect that change.
II. Price Speculation
However, the existence of large inventories
also introduces the possibility of price instability
arising from "speculation." Consider,
for example, the extreme case of gold, when
it is only a commodity, and not used as
money. Gold is obviously very durable. And
its consumption and its production in any
year, or even in any decade, are both very
small relative to the size of the total existing
stock. The costs of storage are relatively low.
It is also nearly indestructible: its services as
ornament or store of value are consumed
with little or no disappearance or dissipation.
Most of the gold that was ever mined presumably
still exists, and is potentially available
as an addition to the market supply
from new production-at prices deemed sufficiently
above equilibrium. Gold is currently
produced; and its rate of production does
' Muth's 1961 article is, of course, now a classic.
However, an excellent much-earlier statement of the
way in which information and expectations affect the
wheat price appears (of course!) in Alfred Marshall. The
accompanying marginal note reads "Nearly all dealings
in commodities that are not very perishable, are affected
by calculation of the future" (pp. 337-38). Marshall
perhaps failed to close his argument by stating explicitly
that expected prices enter into today's production decisions,
although that is clearly implied.
21t was in precisely the context of inventories-and
by explicit analogy with the wheat market-that I once
explained Keynes' theory of the "speculative demand"
for money (or bonds). In my Macroeconomic Theory (pp.
175-76), I argued that, in the bond market-as in the
wheat market-speculation on future bond prices, in
the presence of large outstanding stocks of bonds and of
money, by agents who form expectations of "normal"
market-clearing prices, tends to stabilize bond prices at
or close to their normal level-thereby preventing interest
rate fluctuations from stabilizing aggregate demand
for goods and services in the short run against exogenous
variations in saving or investment propensities.
Although the term rational expectations had not yet
been invented, I was arguing that rational expectations
explained an interest-elastic (or bond-price-elastic) demand
for money.
31t is therefore somewhat anomalous that, although
Muth thus demolished the previous theory of the "cornhog
cycle," it is my impression that traces of such
price-quantity behavior still persist.