tradicts the principle of optimal taxation that
tax rates should vary with a number of elas-
ticities. However, the optimal tax models are
based on strong assumptions that are often
implausible or virtually impossible to vali-
date. Consequently, there is no empirical
basis for determining how different com-
modities and sources of income should be
taxed. Moreover, the compliance and en-
forcement costs of such a system could be
large enough to more than offset the poten-
tial inefficiencies of a uniform tax. In the
absence of reliable data, it is safer to rely on
the comprehensive approach rather than to
introduce tax differentials that will generate
their own distortions.36
According to Simons and others, income
is the sum of an individual's consumption
and change in net worth during a particular
time period. For a long time, the federal
income tax base was a far cry from a com-
prehensive definition of income. In 1986,
however, Congress reversed its previous
practice and enacted a wholesale tax reform
that moved the income tax a long way to-
ward the Simons' ideal. This remarkable
piece of legislation can provide the basis for
achieving the distributive objectives dis-
cussed earlier with moderate tax rates.
The 1986 Tax Reform.37 The Tax Reform
Act of 1986, a major step toward compre-
hensive income taxation, greatly improved
the fairness and efficiency of the tax system.
The major accomplishments of the act are as
follows:
By doubling personal exemptions and in-
creasing the standard deduction, the act re-
lieved about 5 million poor people from
paying any income tax. This step restored
the principle (abandoned by Congress in
1978) that people who are officially desig-
nated as "poor" should not be required to
pay income tax. The principle was perpetu-
ated by the resumption in 1989 of an auto-
matic annual adjustment of the exemptions
and standard deduction for inflation.
Significant increases were made in the
earned income credit for wage earners with
families. These increases eliminated almost
the entire Social Security payroll tax (includ-
ing the employer's share) for those eligible
for the full credit and reduced the tax bur-
den for many low-income workers.
For the first time since 1921, realized capi-
tal gains were made taxable as ordinary in-
come. This is the keystone of comprehensive
tax reform: it reduces the incentive to con-
vert ordinary income into capital gains and
removes one of the major elements of tax
shelter arrangements. Moreover, this change
made it possible to reduce tax rates without
reducing the progressivity of the income tax.
A good start was made to reverse the
erosion of the individual income tax base.
For example, unemployment benefits, which
were previously taxable only if a married
taxpayer's income exceeded $18,000 ($12,000
if single), were made taxable regardless of
the size of income. Deductions for state and
local sales taxes were eliminated and those
for consumer interest were phased out. For
administrative reasons, deductions for unre-
imbursed business expenses, costs incurred
in earning investment income, and other
miscellaneous expenses were allowed only to
the extent that they exceed a floor of two
percent of income.
Some of the most egregious loopholes and
special tax benefits were eliminated. Many
tax shelters were rendered unprofitable by
denying deductions for losses from passive
activity against income from anything but
passive activities.3' Tax subsidies for bor-
rowing (other than for mortgages) were elim-
inated by another limitation on the deduc-
tion for interest expenses to the amount of
investment income reported on the individ-
ual's tax return.39 Deductions for contribu-