same is not so readily apparent for the period
1953 to 1958. But, in any event, such extenuating
circumstances are quite irrelevant to my
point; for I am not suggesting that the stability of
money was the major cause of economic instability-
or at any rate, not yet! All I am arguing is
that (i) there is no basis for the monetarists' suggestion
that our postwar instability can be traced
to monetary instability-our most unstable
periods have coincided with periods of relative
monetary stability; and (ii) stability of the
money supply is not enough to give us a stable
economy, precisely because there are exogenous
disturbances.

Finally, let me mention that I have actually
made an attempt at rerunning history to see
whether a stable money supply would stabilize
the economy, though in a way that I readily
acknowledge is much inferior to the real thing,
namely through a simulation with the MPS. The
experiment, carried out in cooperation with
Papademos, covered the relatively quiet period
from the beginning of 1959 to the introduction of
price-wage controls in the middle of 1971. If
one eliminates all major sources of shocks, for
example, by smoothing federal government
expenditures, we found, as did Otto Eckstein in
an earlier experiment, that a stable money
growth of 3 percent per year does stabilize the
economy, as expected. But when we allowed for
all the historical shocks, the result was that with
a constant money growth the economy was far
from stable-in fact, it was distinctly less stable
than actual experience, by a factor of 50 percent.
B. The Overall Effectiveness of Postwar
Stabilization Policies

But even granted that a smooth money supply
will not produce a very stable world and that
there is therefore room for stabilization policies,
monetarists will still argue that we should nonetheless
eschew such policies. They claim, first,
that allowing for unpredictably variable lags and
unforseeable future shocks, we do not know
enough to successfully design stabilization
policies, and second, that the government would
surely be incapable of choosing the appropriate
policies or be politically willing to provide
timely enforcement. Thus, in practice, stabilization
policies will result in destabilizing the
economy much of the time.
This view is supported by two arguments, one
logical and one empirical. The logical argument
is the one developed in Friedman's Presidential
Address (1968). An attempt at stabilizing the
economy at full employment is bound to be destabilizing
because the full employment or
natural rate is not known with certainty and is
subject to shifts in time; and if we aim for the
incorrect rate, the result must perforce be explosive
inflation or deflation. By contrast, with a
constant money supply policy, the economy will
automatically hunt for, and eventually discover,
that shifty natural rate, wherever it may be
hiding.

This argument, I submit, is nothing but a
debating ploy. It rests on the preposterous assumption
that the only alternative to a constant
money growth is the pursuit of a very precise
unemployment target which will be adhered to
indefinitely no matter what, and that if the target
is off in the second decimal place, galloping
inflation is around the corner. In reality, all that
is necessary to pursue stabilization policies is a
rough target range that includes the warranted
rate, itself a range and not a razor edge; and, of
course, responsible supporters of stabilization
policies have long been aware of the fact that the
target range needs to be adjusted in time on the
basis of forseeable shifts in the warranted range,
as well as in the light of emerging evidence that
the current target is not consistent with price
stability. It is precisely for this reason that I, as
well as many other nonmonetarists, would side
with monetarists in strenuous opposition to
recent proposals for a target unemployment rate
rigidly fixed by statute (although there is nothing
wrong with Congress committing itself and the
country to work toward the eventual achievement
of some target unemployment rate through
structural changes rather than aggregate demand
policies).

Clearly, even the continuous updating of
targets cannot guarantee that errors can be