annuities.15 The key, we learned, is to have a
transition in which the personal retirement account
annuities gradually substitute for pay-asyou-
go benefits, allowing the pay-as-you-go tax
rate to decline and the PRA contribution rate to
increase until the transition is complete.
Of course, the demonstration that such a transition
is feasible doesn't mean that it is desirable.
A pure investment-based PRA plan would
involve more risk than many individuals might
want, a subject to which I will return later. But
a shift to a mixed system that avoids an increase
in the payroll tax rate or in private saving might
be an economic improvement. I'm sorry that I
couldn't offer that solution when President Reagan
asked for it.
My point in recalling this is that economic
research has changed what we regard as feasible.
Similarly, future research can and will develop
new ways to provide social insurance
protection with greater economic efficiency and
more responsiveness to individual tastes. A basic
principle of designing social insurance policies
should be a willingness to accept such
ideas when they become available.
Separating Social Insurance from Income
Redistribution.-As I indicated earlier, social
insurance programs are not means tested. Eligibility
for benefits does not depend on the income
or wealth of the recipient but on an event
like reaching age 65, beginning a spell of unemployment,
or incurring a medical problem.
Not surprisingly, the evidence that I cited makes
it clear that today's social insurance programs
do not redistribute income to the poor. Indeed,
the positive correlation of income and longevity
tilts the net benefit of Social Security and
Medicare to households with higher lifetime
incomes. The structure of unemployment
insurance rules causes a similar shift in that
program.
There is, of course, a role for means-tested
programs that are more narrowly focused on
individuals who demonstrate that they have low
income or assets. Although I doubt the desirability
of the myriad of existing in-kind programs
like food stamps and housing subsidies  (Moffitt, 2003), I have no doubt about the appropriateness
of transferring income to the very
poor.
There is, moreover, a clear case for being
more generous to some demographic groups
than to others. The existing Supplemental Security
Income program provides means-tested
benefits to those over age 65 whose Social Security
benefits plus private resources do not
together reach some minimal level. A more
generous means-tested program, targeted at individuals
over age 75, would not distort labor
supply to the same extent that it would for
younger ones. It is possible, therefore, to have
more protection with less distortion in such a
means-tested program. It is a shameful feature
of our Social Security system that, even with the
Supplemental Security Income program, 10 percent
of those over age 65 are in poverty while
Social Security provides nearly $500 billion a
year in benefits to individuals who are financially
more comfortable.
To the extent that distributional concerns motivate
the design of social insurance, the emphasis
should be on eliminating poverty and not on
the overall distribution of income or the general
extent of inequality. Like most economists, I
accept the Pareto principle that an economy is
better off if someone gains and no one loses.
This is true even if the gainer has above-average
income, causing a Gini coefficient measure of
income distribution to shift to greater inequality.
Although there may be spiteful egalitarians
who reject this Pareto principle, I believe that
most economists agree with me. To see if you
do, ask yourself whether you think it would be
a good thing if everyone reading this article
received $50 by some magical process that did
not decrease the income or wealth of anyone
else. Since we are an above-income group, national
inequality would rise. Nevertheless, I
think there are few who would reject bestowing
this extra wealth on us all.
This brings me to the end of my four economic
principles of social insurance. I turn now to discuss
how the three major forms of social insurance
could be improved by shifting to a system that
combines government insurance with individual
investment-based accounts: unemployment insurance
savings accounts (UISAs) backed up by a
government line of credit, personal retirement accounts
(PRAs) that supplement ordinary pay-asyou-
go Social Security benefits, and personal  15 Alternative plans could achieve the transition without  any rise in taxes by allowing the Social Security Trust Fund  to borrow for a temporary period.