model on its head. There people save only because
of their desire for consumption in retirement.
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales
(2003, 2006) have statistically affirmed
Weber's hypothesis that religion is correlated
both with attitudes toward savings and with
actual savings. In addition, they have more generally
affirmed the quantitative significance of
culture for savings and consumption; in their
regressions, variables reflecting culture have as
much power as variables derived from the lifecycle
hypothesis in explaining cross-country
savings ratios.45
Consumption Entitlements and Obligations.-
While sociology is useful in giving us the general
insight that consumption depends on cultural
norms, we need to be more specific. What
is the nature of those norms? They can frequently
be described in two ways: as entitlements
and, also sometimes, as obligations to
spend. Again some examples will illustrate.
First, oddly, people have obligations to
spend. Social history is full of the obligation to
keep up appearances. Most Wall Street bankers,
for example, do not live like mothers on welfare.
They do not want to. But, even if they did,
it would occasion gossip. It is not what they
should do. History is replete with stories of the
debt of aristocrats struggling to maintain their
social obligations.46 As just one example, the
debts to British merchants by Southern planters,
who were keeping up with the Joneses of the
eighteenth century, are considered a significant
factor underlying the Southern support of the
American Revolution.47
In addition to obligations to spend, there are
also entitlements. The lost-ticket paradox of
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1981,
457) gives an illustration. Eighty-eight percent
of respondents to a questionnaire said they would
buy a $10 theater ticket if they arrived at a theater
to see a play and found that they had lost a $10
bill. In contrast, only 46 percent said they would
buy a new $10 ticket in the same situation if
they had lost a previously purchased ticket.
Tversky and Kahneman explain this difference
by "mental accounts," but an explanation
in terms of entitlements is equally valid. Tversky
and Kahneman say that those who have lost
the $10 bill do not connect that loss to the play.
In their mental account, its cost is just $10. But
those who have lost the ticket see themselves as
paying for it twice. In their mental account, its
cost is $20. Those with the lost ticket then tend
to opt out, because they see $20 as too much to
pay to see the play. But the difference in behavior
for those who lost the ticket and those who
lost the $10 bill could also have been interpreted
in terms of entitlements. Most people want to
think of themselves as responsible human beings.
When they lose the ticket, they do not feel
entitled to just buy another one. That is not the
type of person they aspire to be.
We should also observe that it is not coincidental
that the lost ticket paradox could be explained
both by mental accounting and by
norms. Formally, any model of mental accounting
can be translated into a model of norms: just
replace the rules of mental accounting as the
norms that people think they should follow.48
But even though norms and mental accounting
may be equivalent, interpretations in terms of
norms are important for this lecture. Mental accounting
has the connotation, whether rightly or
wrongly, of being a heuristic for quick decisions.
Such a heuristic will, of course, sometimes result
in cognitive error. Whether rightly or wrongly,
most economists would dismiss cognitive error as
unimportant. Why? because in their view people
are smart about what they want, and their decisions
are also very purposeful. But norms cannot
be dismissed so easily. As I argued earlier, people
feel strongly about adherence to them. Their