prices are a weighted average of prepackaged
and own-account software prices with arbitrary
weights of 75 percent for own-account and 25
percent for prepackaged software. These price
indexes do not hold the software performance
constant and present a distorted picture of software
prices, as well as software output and
investment.

F. Research Opportunities
The official price indexes for computers and
semiconductors provide the paradigm for economic
measurement. These indexes capture the
steady decline in IT prices and the recent acceleration
in this decline. The official price indexes
for central office switching equipment and prepackaged
software also hold quality constant.
BEA and BLS, the leading statistical agencies
in price research, have carried out much of the
best work in this area. However, a critical role
has been played by price research at IBM, long
the dominant firm in information technology.'8
It is important to emphasize that information
technology is not limited to applications of
semiconductors. Switching and terminal equipment
for voice, data, and video communications
has come to rely on semiconductor technology
and the empirical evidence on prices of this
equipment reflects this fact. Transmission gear
employs technologies with rates of progress that
far outstrip those of semiconductors. This important
gap in our official price statistics can
only be filled by constant quality price indexes
for all types of communications equipment.
Investment in software is more important
than investment in hardware. This was essentially
invisible until BEA introduced new measures
of prepackaged, custom, and own-account
software investment into the national accounts
in 1999. This is a crucial step in understanding
the role of information technology in the American
economy. Unfortunately, software prices
are another statistical blind spot, with only
prices of prepackaged software adequately represented
in the official system of price statistics.
The daunting challenge that lies ahead is to
construct constant quality price indexes for custom
and own-account software.
II. The Role of Information Technology
At the aggregate level IT is identified with the
outputs of computers, communications equipment,
and software. These products appear in
the GDP as investments by businesses, households,
and governments along with net exports
to the rest of the world. The GDP also includes
the services of IT products consumed by households
and governments. A methodology for analyzing
economic growth must capture the
substitution of IT outputs for other outputs of
goods and services.

While semiconductor technology is the driving
force behind the spread of IT, the impact of
the relentless decline in semiconductor prices is
transmitted through falling IT prices. Only net
exports of semiconductors, defined as the difference
between U.S. exports to the rest of the
world and U.S. imports, appear in the GDP.
Sales of semiconductors to domestic manufacturers
of IT products are precisely offset by
purchases of semiconductors and are excluded
from the GDP.

Constant quality price indexes, like those reviewed
in the previous section, are a key component
of the methodology for analyzing the
American growth resurgence. Computer prices
were incorporated into the NIPA in 1985 and
are now part of the PPI as well. Much more
recently, semiconductor prices have been included
in the NIPA and the PPI. Unfortunately,
evidence on the prices of communications
equipment and software is seriously incomplete,
so that the official price indexes are seriously
misleading.

A. Output

The output data in Table 1 are based on the
most recent benchmark revision of the national
accounts, updated through 1999.19 The output
concept is similar, but not identical, to the concept
of gross domestic product used by the
BEA. Both measures include final outputs purchased
by businesses, governments, households,
and the rest of the world. Unlike the BEA
concept, the output measure in Table 1 also