The limits of demand management policies
have become clearly visible in recent
years. Let us look at the issues through the
medium of specific problems, say the joint
problems of too much unemployment and
too much inflation. Policies of demand
management alone have appeared to be
adequate to deal with one or the other, but
not both together. If demand is stimulated
enough to bring down the unemployment
rate to a full-employment minimum, there
is danger of generating undue inflationary
pressure as a side effect. Conversely, antiinflationary
policies of demand restriction
run the danger of generating excessive unemployment
while holding down the inflation
rate.

How might supply-side policies be introduced
to lower both the inflation and unemployment
rates at the same time'? It is
conventionally thought that policies of aggregative
demand stimulus through traditional
fiscal and monetary policies might be
able to bring down the U.S. unemployment
rate to about 5.5 percent. This is not a firm
point estimate, and is subject to error of at
least one-half point above or below that
figure, but it is not, in any case, a full-employment
target figure.

One way, but not the only way, of getting
to full employnment without generating fresh
inflationary pressure is to design a jobs program
for about 1.0 million long-term, hard
core unemployed. This jobs program cannot
be described in full detail in the context
of this presentation, but it is not to be
viewed as an ordinary public jobs program.
It is viewed as a job training program
aimed at people who show signs of receptivity
to training and enlisting the participation
of employers who provide really productive
jobs with potential for upward
mobility. The 1.0 million target, spread over
three years, is not purely indicative. It is
meant to be plausible and necessary if full
employment is to be reached by 1980-82 in
the United States.

Apart from the fact that some public
funds are to be spent on this program, it is
not a typical demand management policy.
It is aimed at increasing the supply of
goods, at raising labor productivity, at sectors
of the economy where job training can
be accomodated or needed, and at sectors
of the labor force. It is basically a supplyside
policy and needs for its implementation/
assessment a full scale analysis through
the medium of a Leontief-Keynes system.
In first approximations, such assessments
have been made with the appropriate version
of the Wharton Model.

In anticipation of criticism of this policy
approach from the side of those who are
strongly wedded to emphasis on demand
management, I want to stress that a jobs
program aimed at increasing productivity
and reducing hard core unemployment is
not a futile exercise in pushing some subsidized
workers into the ranks of the employed
while pushing others out. The program
is intended to have balance; i.e., to be
part of a larger program with corresponding
support from the demand side. Such
support could not be justified from the
point of view of inflation potential unless
steps are being taken to complement the
effect with a jobs program and eventual
lifting of productivity. Undue preoccupation
with demand policies is not going to be
adequate to meet the problems of the day,
nor is pure emphasis on supply. Both sides
of the economy must be coordinated in
policy formation.

It should also be emphasized that demand
policies of federal expenditures for
public service employment appear to be inferior
to private sector jobs programs of
the type being mentioned here. In the
former case, there is no long-term opportunity
for those taken into the program and
there is no contribution to national productivity.
As long as job expenditures are going
to be made, they ought, preferably, to be directed
to an effort that promises to have
some lasting benefit.

This example of the jobs program is one
that fits the contemporary American economic
scene and has been investigated with
a U.S. model and data. The underlying
idea, however, is meant to be much more
general. It is that the whole industrial world
is faced with a series of new supply-side
economic problems. The problems of cyclical
stabilization and reaching full employment