to negotiate concessions from the UAW certainly
show that wage rates are not completely
rigid. But those very instances seem
to me only to confirm the importance of
social convention in less extreme circumstances.
After all, people have been known
to try to claw their way into a lifeboat who
would never dream of cheating on a lift-line.
I think I have made the case that the most
eminent representative of orthodox economics
in the 1940's was fully aware of the many
obstacles to "thorough-going competition"
among workers, that is, of the many ways in
which the labor market may "fail." In particular,
one cannot under those circumstances
expect the labor market always to
clear. Pigou certainly drew that conclusion.
He says, in the Preface to Lapses: "Professor
Dennis Robertson... has warned me
that the form of the book may suggest that
I am in favour of attacking the problem
of unemployment by manipulating wages
rather than by manipulating demand. I
wish, therefore, to say clearly that this is not
so" (P. v).
Pigou clearly felt the tension between
market efficiency and market failure. Nevertheless,
he did not come down on the side of
market failure, even after the 1930's. The
very title of Lapses from Full Employment
tells us that much. Evidently he concluded
that the tendency of the capitalist economy
to seek (and find) its full-employment
equilibrium was strong enough so that departures
from full employment could be regarded
as mere episodes. Is that surprising?
Well, to begin with, there is no accounting
for Rohrschach tests. One person's ink blot
is another person's work of art. But I think
there is also something more systematic to
be said.
In the Theory of Unemployment, Pigou
gives an elaborate analysis of the short-run
elasticity of demand for labor. He is very
careful: he allows for the elasticity of supply
of complementary raw materials; he allows
for the (presumably very high) price elasticity
of demand for exports; he discusses the
effects of discounting future returns to
labor. It is a masterly attempt to get a grip
on orders of magnitude. It is all based on
the presumption that the only possible starting
point is the elasticity of the marginalproduct-
of-labor curve. Let me remind you
that in the old standby, two-factor CobbDouglas
case, the elasticity of demand for
labor with respect to the real wage is the
reciprocal of the share of capital. Everybody'
s back-of-the-envelope puts the capital
share at 1/4 and the elasticity of demand
for labor at 4. This is not exactly the way
Pigou proceeds, but he reaches the same
conclusion: the initial estimate of the elasticity
is "certain to be (numerically) much
larger than - 1 and may well amount to - 5
or more." There follow some modifications,
but the conclusion remains that in times of
depression, the aggregate elasticity of demand
for labor with respect to the real wage
"cannot, on the least favourable assumption
here suggested, be numerically less than - 3
and may well be larger than -4" except
perhaps in the very shortest run.
For practical purposes, one would want
to know the elasticity of demand with respect
to the nominal wage, taking account
of the likelihood that prices will follow
wages down, at least partially. (Obviously if
product prices fall equiproportionally with
wage rates, as Keynes thought might
happen in unlucky circumstances, the real
wage doesn't move at all and employment
will not improve.)' The details of Pigou's
calculations do not concern us, but his conclusion
does: "... we may... not unreasonably
put the elasticity of the money demand
for labour in times of deep depression at not
less numerically than - 1.5."
If I could believe that, I too could believe
that the labor market generally clears. To
reduce the unemployment rate by 6 percentage
points is to increase employment by
about 6 percent, if we ignore for this purpose
the side effects that go to make up
Okun's Law. If that could be accomplished
by a real-wage reduction of 2 percent, or
even less, that is, by foregoing one year's
normal productivity increase, than I could
imagine that the labor market might easily
'Neither Pigou nor Keynes invoked Kaldor's notion
that prices can be expected to fall faster than wages in
a recession with the resulting rise in real wages providing
the force for recovery from the demand side,
through a distributional shift toward wage incomes
which generate more spending per dollar than other
incomes do.