THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
welfare gain for the group. We can also specify
the compensation in terms of one or a subset
of goods, rather than all of them: There is no
single, right way to carry these comparisons out.
However it is done, we obtain a method for
evaluating policies that has comprehensible units
and is built up from individual preferences.
There is a great tradition of quantitative public
finance that applies this general framework
using well-chosen Taylor expansions to calculate
estimates of the compensation parameter A,
"welfare triangles" as Arnold C. Harberger
called them. Today we use numerical simulation
of general-equilibrium models, often dynamic
and subject to unpredictable shocks, to
carry out welfare analysis with the general logic
that I have just sketched. Some examples will, I
hope, convey the applicability of this approach
and some of the estimates that have emerged.
Martin J. Bailey's (1956) thought-experiment
of a perfectly predictable inflation at a constant
rate, induced by sustained growth in the money
supply, was a pioneering example of the quantitative
evaluation of policy. In a replication of
the Bailey study, I estimated the welfare gain
from reducing the annual inflation rate from 10
to 0 percent to be a perpetual consumption flow
of 1 percent of income.1 Some economists take
estimates like this to imply that inflation is a
relatively modest problem, but 1 percent of income
is a serious amount of money, and in any
case, the gain depends on how much inflation
there is. The gain from eliminating a 200-
percent annual inflation-well within the range
of recent experience in several South American
economies-is about 7 percent of income.
The development of growth theory, in which
the evolution of an economy over time is traced
to its sources in consumer preferences, technology,
and government policies, opened the way
for extending general-equilibrium policy analysis
to a much wider class of dynamic settings. In
the 1980's, a number of economists used versions
of neoclassical growth theory to examine
the effects of taxation on the total stock of
capital, not just the composition of that stock.2
The models used in these studies differ in their
' Lucas (2000). My estimates are based on the money
demand estimates in Allan H. Meltzer (1963).
2 For example, William A. Brock and Stephen J.
Tumovsky (1981), Christophe P. Chamley (1981), Lawdetails,
but all were variations on a one-good
growth model in which consumers (either an
infinitely lived dynasty or a succession of generations)
maximize the utility of consumption
and leisure over time, firms maximize profit,
and markets are continuously cleared.
In general, these studies found that reducing
capital income taxation from its current U.S.
level to zero (using other taxes to support an
unchanged rate of government spending) would
increase the balanced-growth capital stock by
30 to 60 percent. With a capital share of around
0.3, these numbers imply an increase of consumption
along a balanced growth path of 7.5 to
15 percent. Of course, reaching such a balanced
path involves a period of high investment rates
and low consumption. Taking these transition
costs into account, overall welfare gains amount
to perhaps 2 to 4 percent of annual consumption,
in perpetuity.
Production per adult in France is about 70
percent of production per adult in the United
States. Edward C. Prescott (2002) observes that
hours worked per adult in France, measured as
a fraction of available hours, are also about 70
percent of the comparable U.S. figure. Using
estimates for France and the United States of the
ratio (1 + Tr)/( - Th) that equals the marginal
rate of substitution between consumption
and leisure in the neoclassical growth model, he
shows that tax differences can account for the
entire difference in hours worked and, amplified
by the indirect effect on capital accumulation,
for the entire difference in production. The
steady-state welfare gain to French households
of adopting American tax rates on labor and
consumption would be the equivalent of a consumption
increase of about 20 percent. The conclusion
is not simply that if the French were to
work American hours, they could produce as
much as Americans do. It is that the utility
consequences of doing so would be equivalent
to a 20-percent increase in consumption with no
increase in work effort!
The gain from reducing French taxes to U.S.
levels can in part be viewed as the gain from
adopting a flat tax on incomes,3 but it is doubtrence
H. Summers (1981), Alan J. Auerbach and Laurence
J. Kotlikoff (1987), and Kenneth L. Judd (1987).
3 See also Robert E. Hall and Alvin Rabushka (1995).
2
MARCH 2003