in the physical and biological sciences is
now running into situations which have
strong ethical implications outside the
scientific subculture. The myth that science
is simply discovering knowledge
about an objectively unchangeable world
may have had some validity in the early
stages of science but as the sciences develop
this myth becomes less and less
valid. The learning process of science is
now running into two serious difficulties.
The first might be called the generalized
Heisenberg principle. When we are trying
to obtain knowledge about a system by
changing its inputs and outputs of information,
these inputs and outputs will
change the system itself, and under some
circumstances they may change it radically.
My favorite illustration of the Heisenberg
principle is that of a man who inquires
through the door of the bedroom
where his friend is sick, "How are you?"
whereupon the friend replies "Fine," and
the effort kills him. In the social sciences
of course the generalized Heisenberg principle
predominates because knowledge of
the social sciences is an essential part of
the social system itself, hence objectivity
in the sense of investigating a world which
is unchanged by the investigation of it is
an absurdity.
The second difficulty is that as science
develops it no longer merely investigates
the world; it creates the world which it is
investigating. We see this even in the
physical sciences where the evolution of
the elements has now been resumed in this
part of the universe after some six billion
years. We are increasingly going to see
this in the biological sciences, which will
only find out about the evolutionary process
by actively engaging in it, and changing
its course. In the social sciences one
can defend the proposition that most of
what we can really know is what we create
ourselves and that prediction in social
systems can be achieved only by setting
up consciously created systems which will
make the predictions come true. Knowledge
of random systems can only be obtained
by destroying them, that is, by taking
the randomness out of them. There is
a great deal of evidence, for instance, that
the fluctuations of prices in organized
commodity or secuirity markets are essentially
random in nature. All we can possibly
discover therefore by studying these
fluctuations is what bias there might be in
the dice. If we want to predict the future
of prices in such a market we will have to
control it, that is, we will have to set up a
system of counterspeculation which will
guarantee a given future course of prices.
The gold standard is a primitive example
of such a system in which it is possible to
predict that the price of gold will lie
within the gold points as long as the system
remains intact. Similarly, we can predict
the inside temperature of a house
with an effective furnace and thermostat
much better than we can predict the
outside temperature simply because we
control one and not the other.
We cannot escape the proposition that
as science moves from pure knowledge toward
control, that is, toward creating
what it knows, what it creates becomes a
problem of ethical choice, and will depend
upon the common values of the societies
in which the scientific subculture is
embedded, as well as of the scientific subculture.
Under these circumstances science
cannot proceed at all without at least
an implicit ethic, that is, a subculture with
appropriate common values. The problem
exists in theory even in what might be described
as the objective phase of science,
that is, the phase in which it is simply investigating
"what is," because the question
of the conditions under which ignorance
is bliss is not an empty one. The assumption
which is almost universal in academic
circles that ignorance cannot possibly
be bliss might under some circum-