There is a long-standing tension in economics
between belief in the advantages of
the market mechanism and awareness of its
imperfections. 'Ever since Adam Smith,
economists have been distinguished from
lesser mortals by their understanding of and
-I think one has to say-their admiration
for the efficiency, anonymity, and subtlety
of decentralized competitive markets as an
instrument for the allocation of resources
and the imputation of incomes. I think we
all know this; for confirmation one can look
at the results of a paper (James Kearl et al.)
presented at the last annual meeting, reporting
the responses of professional economists
to a sort of survey of technical opinion. The
propositions which generated the greatest
degree of consensus were those asserting the
advantages of free trade and flexible exchange
rates, favoring cash transfers over
those in kind, and noting the disadvantages
of rent controls, interest rate ceilings, and
minimum wage laws.

Views on these policy issues did not seem
to represent mere conservative ideology:
half of the respondents agreed and another
30 percent agreed "with provisions" that
redistribution of income (presumably toward
the poorest) is a legitimate function
of government policy. The profession's reservations
about rent control, interest rate
ceilings, and minimum wage laws do not
appear to reflect a rejection of the goals of
those measures, but rather a feeling that
nonprofessionals simply do not understand
fully the consequences, often unexpected
and undesired, of messing around with the
market mechanism. Most of us are conscious
of a conflict that arises in our minds
and consciences because, while we think it is
usually a mistake to fiddle the price system
to achieve distributional goals, we realize
that the public and the political process are
perversely more willing to do that than to
make the direct transfers we would prefer. If
we oppose all distorting transfers, we end up
opposing transfers altogether. Some of us
seem to welcome the excuse, but most of us
feel uncomfortable. I don't think there is
any very good way to resolve that conflict in
practice.

Simultaneously, however, there is an important
current in economics that focuses
on the flaws in the price system, the ways
that real markets fail because they lack
some of the characteristics that make idealized
markets so attractive. I think that
outsiders, who tend to see economists as
simple-minded marketeers, would be
astonished to learn how much of the history
of modern economic analysis can be written
in terms of the study of the sources of
market failure. The catalog runs from natural
and artificial monopoly, to monopolistic
competition, to the importance of public
goods and externalities of many other kinds,
to-most recently-a variety of problems
connected with the inadequate, imperfect,
or asymmetric transmission of information
and with the likelihood that there will simply
be no markets for some of the relevant
goods and services.

Even the vocabulary can be revealing.
Market "imperfection" suggests- a minor
blemish of the sort that can make the
purchase of "irregular" socks a bargain.
Market "failure" sounds like something
more serious. To take a more subtle example,
I mentioned that one kind of flaw in the
system can be the absence of certain
markets. The common generic term for the
reason why markets are missing is "transaction
costs." That sounds rather minor,
the sort of thing that might go away in
due course as accounting and information