I come here with no eye-opening report
from the frontiers of economics, no stirring
cry for reform of conventional economics,
no closely reasoned analysis of an economic
dilemma or puzzle, no scathing or
reproachful scolding of the profession for
its technical preciousness or moral blindness,
no report on painstaking research
results, no valedictory on a lifetime of
theoretical or empirical contributions. The
AEA presidential addresses have been all
of these things.

But tonight, going against our current
fashion of telling the world what's wrong
with economics, I offer a modest contribution
to the immodest subject of what's
right with economics-and, in particular,
what's right with economics as a guide to
public policy. In doing so, I won't ignore
the dark side of the moon-indeed, I can't,
since I will deal at some length with the bedeviling
subject of inflation. But believing
that it is at least as reasonable to judge a
discipline by its successes as by its failures,
I intend to accentuate the positive.
I. The Critical Look Inward
In recent years, as I shall illustrate in a
moment, we have instead accentuated the
negative. In good part, this has taken the
becoming form of mea culpa or rather
nostra culpa. We have, for example, readily
confessed that the inflationary shocks of
1973-74 caught not just the economy but
the economist by surprise. On this and
other fronts, the chorus of self-criticism
has risen to a new crescendo. It is almost
as if we take pride in our humility. Nietzsche
must have been thinking of economists
when he observed that "he who
despises himself nevertheless esteems himself
as a self-despiser."

This is not to imply that economists'
criticisms are all self-inflicted wounds. Far
from it. Often among our colleagues'
favorite targets are the shortcomings of
mainstream economics, the misuse of
modern techniques, the fallacies of conventional
wisdom-in each case, the target
is not the critic's but his colleagues' brand
of economics, not mea culpa but eorum
culpa.

In any event, he who comes to praise
economics risks being buried in the barrage
of indictments that economists have
brought against themselves and their
brethren. Let me give you a sampling of
some that will be ringing in my ears as I
follow the parlous path of economic virtue.
Ceremonial occasions-presidential, memorial,
or inaugural addresses-in particular
seem to evoke musings on the
troubled or even dismal state of our science.
For the AEA faithful, I need only
recall John Kenneth Galbraith condemning
neoclassical and neo-Keynesian economics
for ignoring power and thus losing
contact with the real world; Wassily
Leontief attacking mathematical economics
for building a showy superstructure
on weak empirical foundations and
unverified assumptions, and thus losing
contact with the real world; Kenneth