In some countries and industries, the trade
regime was used as the key policy instrument
to provide incentives for import-substituting
investment and production by private firms. In
other circumstances, state-owned enterprises
were established, and investments were made
directly by the state sector in new manufacturing
activities. In that case, the trade regime
provided protection to the state-owned enterprises,
although their budget constraints were,
in any event, very soft. None of these policies,
as adopted, provided means of identifying
where dynamic externalities were largest, nor
was there any provision for reduction of protection
after an initial period. Indeed, protection
was virtually automatic for any new
import-substitution industry.
A final aspect of early policies also contributed
to high and indiscriminate levels of protection.
That is, as countries embarked on
ambitious development plans, inflation rates
rose to levels significantly above those in industrial
countries (although far below inflation
rates prevailing in many developing countries
today). Demand for foreign exchange was rising
rapidly in response to the development
plans, rising incomes, and domestic inflation.
Nonetheless, policy makers in most developing
countries chose to maintain their fixed nominal
exchange rates. In part, this reflected the perception,
noted above, that there was little response
to prices and that, indeed, maintaining
the nominal exchange rate "taxed" agriculture
while simultaneously subsidizing capital goods
imports. In part, exchange rates were held fixed
because it was believed that so doing made imports
of capital goods cheaper and thus increased
investment. The net result was, of
course, real appreciation of the exchange rate,
which further intensified ex ante payments
imbalances, reduced foreign exchange availability,
and induced greater restrictiveness in
import licensing.
It will be recalled that the 1950's and
1960's were a time of unprecedented economic
growth for the industrial countries and
for world trade. Buoyed in part by international
markets, and in part by the stimuli of
increased investment and other aspects of development
programs, the rates of growth of per
capita incomes rose markedly relative to historical
levels in most developing countries,
although they remained below those in industrial
countries with few exceptions. Even the
growth of industry itself was fairly rapid, as
the "easy" import-substitution opportunities
were by and large undertaken first.'7
However, with real exchange rate appreciation
and the pull of resources into newly
profitable, import-competing industries, the
growth of foreign exchange earnings inevitably
slowed. It is not widely appreciated that
developing countries, which had a 44 percent
share of world exports of agricultural commodities
in 1955, lost share to the point where
they had only 31 percent by 1970.18
With acceleration in the growth of demand
for foreign exchange, and deceleration in the
growth of supply, foreign exchange difficulties
were inevitable. The export pessimism premise
had been self-fulfilling, given the policies
that were followed. The drop in primary commodity
prices in the early 1950's accentuated
the phenomenon, but affected the timing more
than the actuality of the result. The initial
response by most policy makers was to impose
rationing of scarce foreign exchange
(and require the surrender of foreign exchange
from exports) on imports, and the resulting
system had little to do with encouraging infant
industries.
Although initial rationing of imports was
usually on a relatively uniform and across-theboard
procedure, controls over foreign trade
generally became more restrictive and complex
over the next two decades, both in
'7 See Raul Prebisch ( 1984) for the argument. It can be
argued that, with uniform incentives, import substitution
would have taken place first in those industries with least
comparative disadvantage. In fact, the use of import licensing
and prohibitions meant that rates of protection
were not uniform even across import-competing activities.
In addition, monopoly power in the domestic market was
conferred to domestic producers, so that profitability
hinged more on the price elasticity of the demand curve
than on producers' abilities to reduce costs and compete
with imports.
8 Agricultural protection in Japan, Europe, and the
United States may have contributed somewhat to this result.
But in most developing countries, the demand for
food was growing more rapidly than the supply (as producer
prices were suppressed relative to the prices of industrial
goods) and, thus, the supply (demand) curve for
exports (imports) of agricultural commodities was shifting
down (up) (see Krueger, 1990 p. 95).