maximize shareholder value. In the now-standard
theory of the firm, the interests of the shareholders
and the interests of the managers are viewed as
different. The managers are only the agents of the
owners, and accordingly they maximize their own  interests instead. Such incentives are said to turn
the managers into "empire-builders,"61 who will
use the resources they control to increase their
own domains.
Empire-building can result from two types of
motivations. On the one hand, managers may
have only strict economic interests in mind:
they care only about their take-home pay, and
their effort on the job. Such managers, for example,
will be biased in favor of investments
whose operation or construction enhances their
firm-specific human capital, and thereby increases
their bargaining power.
On the other hand, empire-building may be
pursued as a goal of its own, for its own sake.
We saw earlier that most workers have views
regarding how they should or should not perform
their jobs. Accompanying such views,
most managers and workers will have the further
view that the firm should be investing in
those jobs. For this reason, the agents making
the investment decision are likely to engage in
empire-building. We can represent such motivation
by adding a term to the utility function of
the agent-decision maker. Her utility function
will not only depend on her own pecuniary
returns and her expenditure of effort. It will also
include an additional term reflective of her
norms. She will lose utility insofar as the firm's
investment fails to live up to her ideal of what
she thinks it should be. In this case, the typical
norm is that she thinks that the firm should
engage in investment that will enhance her job
performance.
Following the logic of Michael Jensen (1986,
1993), empire-building, accompanied by the
abdication of corporate oversight in favor of
management interests, explains a correlation between
investment and cash flow. Furthermore,
this correlation will occur regardless of the motivation
for the empire-building, whether for purely
economic reasons as in the principal-agent model,
or, instead, because of managers' norms for how
they think they should behave. Jensen has given  many instances of lax corporate oversight in favor
of management interests. For example, he has
cited the excess exploration and drilling operations
of oil companies when retained earnings
were high, from 1975 to 1981,62 and the maintenance
of low-return operations in many US industries,
as in the investments of General Motors
throughout the 1980s.63 In Jensen's views, shareholders
would have fared better if profits had been
returned to them, giving them the option of investing
at a higher rate of return, or perhaps if profits
had been used for takeovers outside the industry.
To cure what he calls the "failure of corporate
internal control," Jensen has also suggested that
firms should issue large amounts of debt, perhaps
even by going private. In that case, the added debt
obligations act as a brake on excess investment.
Regarding investment behavior, Jensen is then on
the same page as Keynesian economists such as
Klein and Goldberger. They refer to "the preference
of many businessmen for internal as opposed
to external financing" (1955, 12-13) and also consider
it the major reason for the dependence of  investment on cash flow.
B. Sociology of the Corporation
Once again, we have seen a neutrality result
that depends on the goals of the respective decision
makers. Accordingly, the norms of corporate
decision makers are central to the
sociology of the corporation. For example, Dirk
M. Zorn (2004) has examined how the locus of
control has changed in large US firms over the
past 40 years. He has shown how this control
has shifted away from those with a production
or a sales orientation to those with a financial
orientation.64 Empirically, this is seen in the rise
of the chief financial officer. Prior to the 1960s,
corporate finances were handled by corporate
treasurers, whose duties were mainly restricted
to keeping the accounts and producing the budgets.
Now, most large corporations have replaced
them by a CFO. With the change in title
has come a change in function. CFOs are typically
central to major decisions. Such a change
affects investment decisions. If they are committed
to their missions, managers with sales or
61 Empire-building is especially emphasized by Jeremy  C. Stein (2003), following Jensen (1986, 1993).  62 Jensen (1986, 327).  63 See Jensen (1993, 853).
64 That distinction was emphasized earlier, for example,  by Neil Fligstein (1990).