ums, it was unable to get any member of the
President's own party to introduce the legisla-
tion in Congress.
Recently, however, Congress enacted legisla-
tion to shift the incentives away from excessive
health insurance. The new health savings ac-
count (HSA) rules, enacted as part of the 2003
Medicare legislation, allow individuals or their
employers to deposit up to $5,000 of pretax
income into a health savings account if they
have a health insurance policy with an equally
large deductible and with protection against cat-
astrophic expenses. The individual foregoes the
advantage of the tax-free income in the form of
the employer-paid premium, but gets an even
larger tax-free income in the form of the health
savings account contribution. Assets in these
IRA-like accounts earn tax-free investment in-
come. Funds not spent in one year automatically
carry forward to the future and can be used to
finance any kind of health care without paying
tax. Funds can also be withdrawn for any other
kind of spending by paying tax at that time.
The health savings accounts create a strong
incentive to choose policies with high deduct-
ibles instead of the current comprehensive low-
deductible and low coinsurance policies. This,
in turn, should change the nature of the demand
for care. Until individual health spending
reaches the deductible limit, money spent on
health care is the individual's own money and
not that of an insurance company. Spending
below the high deductible limit, therefore,
would not have any of the distortion caused by
current policies with low deductibles and low
coinsurance rates. And the requirement that the
policies provide protection for catastrophic lev-
els of spending means that the most important
form of protection is retained or increased at the  same time that the distortions are reduced.26
Of course, anyone who spends several days
in a hospital will exceed the deductible limit. At
that point, the insurance company is paying for
care as it would today and the patient and his
doctor no longer have the incentive to be cost
conscious. The favorable incentive effects of
the HSA could be increased without reducing
the individual's insurance protection by replac-
ing the deductible with a 50-percent coinsur-  ance rate on spending up to twice the level of
the HSA saving deposit. For example, the limit
associated with the $5,000 HSA deposit would
shift from a $5,000 deductible to a 50 percent
co-payment on the first $10,000 of care, causing
significantly more individuals and health spend-
ing to be in the cost-conscious range.
The shift from the current tax-induced com-
prehensive insurance to large deductibles or co-
insurance is not only a way to limit excessive
health care spending, i.e., spending that individ-
uals and their doctors recognize as less valuable
to them than the cost of production. It is also a
way of making health spending reflect each
individual's preferences. While all of us want
good health, the lifestyles choices that individ-
uals make show that some of us value it more
than others. Although we all understand the
adverse health effects of obesity, smoking, and
the lack of exercise, not everyone acts on this
information. Many people knowingly make the
tradeoff to enjoy more eating, to smoke, and to
avoid the rigors of exercise. Just as people make
different lifestyle choices, some are more will-
ing than others to sacrifice more of other con-
sumption to increase spending on health care.
Health savings accounts will allow this expres-
sion of taste in health care spending instead of
effectively inducing almost everyone to pur-
chase high-cost health care.
Health savings accounts may be a model for
Medicare reform. If nothing is done, the cost of
Medicare to the federal government will rise
from 2.4 percent of GDP to about 6 percent by
2030 and 8 percent by 2050. The rising cost of
Medicare is similar to, but even more dramatic
than, the rising cost of Social Security retire-
ment benefits. The remedy for this problem
should have two components: changing the
spending incentives to slow the growth of
Medicare outlays, and using a mixed financing
system to raise the needed funds without the
sharp tax increase that would otherwise be
needed (Feldstein and Samwick, 1997; Feldstein,
1999b).
If health savings accounts are successful, the
high deductibles and coinsurance that will
evolve because of the HSAs for those under age
65 may establish a precedent that will also af-
fect future Medicare benefits and therefore the
spending incentives of the Medicare population.
A mixed financing system for Medicare
could combine a tax-financed Medicare annuity