LUCAS: MACROECONOMIC PRIORITIES
fare gains from the elimination of aggregate
risk, and even accepting the Storesletten et al.
view entails an upward revision of a factor of
only about 5.
The real promise of the Krusell-Smith model
and related formulations, I think, will be in the
study of the relation of policies that reduce the
impact of risk by reducing the variance of
shocks (like aggregate stabilization policies) to
those that act by reallocating risks (like social
insurance policies). Traditionally, these two
kinds of policies have been studied by different
economists, using unrelated models and different
data sets. But both appear explicitly in the
models I have reviewed here, and it is clear that
it will soon be possible to provide a unified
analysis of their costs and benefits.
VI. Other Directions
My plan was to go down a list of all the
things that could have gone wrong with my
1987 calculations but, as I should have anticipated,
possibilities were added to the list faster
than I could eliminate them. I will just note
some of the more interesting of these possibilities,
and then conclude. The level of consumption
risk in a society is, in part, subject to
choice. When in an economy that is subject to
larger shocks, people will live with more consumption
variability and the associated loss in
welfare, but they may also substitute into riskavoiding
technologies, accepting reduced average
levels of production. This possibility shows
up in the precautionary savings-overaccumulation
of capital-that Krusell and Smith (1999,
2002) found. As Garey Ramey and Valerie A.
Ramey (1991) suggested, this kind of substitution
surely shows up in other forms as well.
In an endogenous growth framework, substitution
against risky technologies can affect rates
of growth as well as output levels. Larry E.
Jones et al. (1999) and Epaulard and Pommeret
(2001) explore some of these possibilities,
though neither study attributes large welfare
gains to volatility-induced reductions in growth
rates. Gadi Barlevy (2001) proposes a convex
adjustment cost that makes an erratic path of
investment in knowledge less effective than a
smooth path at the same average level. In such
a setting, reducing shock variability can lead to
higher growth even without an effect on the
average level of investment. He obtains welfare
gains as large as 7 percent of consumption in
models based on this idea, but everything
hinges on a curvature parameter on which there
is little evidence. This is a promising frontier on
which there is much to be done. Surely there are
others.
VII. Conclusions
If business cycles were simply efficient responses
of quantities and prices to unpredictable
shifts in technology and preferences, there
would be no need for distinct stabilization or
demand management policies and certainly no
point to such legislation as the Employment Act
of 1946. If, on the other hand, rigidities of some
kind prevent the economy from reacting efficiently
to nominal or real shocks, or both, there
is a need to design suitable policies and to
assess their performance. In my opinion, this is
the case: I think the stability of monetary aggregates
and nominal spending in the postwar
United States is a major reason for the stability
of aggregate production and consumption during
these years, relative to the experience of the
interwar period and the contemporary experience
of other economies. If so, this stability
must be seen in part as an achievement of the
economists, Keynesian and monetarist, who
guided economic policy over these years.
The question I have addressed in this lecture
is whether stabilization policies that go beyond
the general stabilization of spending that characterizes
the last 50 years, whatever form they
might take, promise important increases in welfare.
The answer to this question is "No": The
potential gains from improved stabilization policies
are on the order of hundredths of a percent
of consumption, perhaps two orders of magnitude
smaller than the potential benefits of available
"supply-side" fiscal reforms. This answer
does depend, certainly, on the degree of risk
aversion. It does not appear to be very sensitive
to the way distribution effects are dealt with,
though it does presuppose a system of unemployment
insurance at postwar U.S. levels. I
have been as explicit as I can be on the way
theory and evidence bear on these conclusions.
When Don Patinkin gave his Money, Interest,
and Prices the subtitle "An Integration of Monetary
and Value Theory," value theory meant, to
VOL. 93 NO. 1
11