Keynes attacked what he called the
classical presumption that persistent unemployment
is voluntary unemployment.
The presumption he challenged is that in
competitive labor markets actual employment
and unemployment reveal workers'
true preferences between work and
alternative uses of time, the presumption
that no one is fully or partially unemployed
whose real wage per hour exceeds
his marginal valuation of an hour of free
time. Orthodox economists found the observed
stickiness of money wages to be
persuasive evidence that unemployment,
even in the Great Depression, was voluntary.
Keynes found decisive evidence
against this inference in the willingness of
workers to accept a larger volume of employment
at a lower real wage resulting
from an increase of prices.
Whenever unemployment could be reduced
by expansion of aggregate demand,
Keynes regarded it as involuntary. He expected
expansion to raise prices and lower
real wages, but this expectation is not
crucial to his argument. Indeed, if it is possible
to raise employment without reduction
in the real wage, his case for calling the unemployment
involuntary is strengthened.
But why is the money wage so stubborn
if more labor is willingly available at the
same or lower real wage5? Consider first
some answers Keynes did not give. He did
not appeal to trade union monopolies or
minimum wage laws. He was anxious, perhaps
over-anxious, to meet his putative
classical opponents on their home field,
the competitive economy\ He did not rely
on any failure of workers to perceive what
a rise in prices does to real wages. The unemployed
take new jobs, the employed
hold old ones, with eyes open. Otherwise
the new situation would be transient.
Instead, Keynes emphasized the institutional
fact that wages are bargained
and set in the monetary unit of account.
Money wage rates are, to use an unKeynesian
term, "administered prices." I'hat is,
they are not set and reset in daily auctions
but posted and fixed for finite periods of
time. This observation led Keynes to his
central explanation: Workers, individually
and in groups, are more concerned with
relative than absolute real wages. They
may withdraw labor if their wages fall
relatively to wages elsewhere, even though
they would not withdraw any if real wages
fall uniformly everywhere. Labor markets
are decentralized, and there is no way
money wages can fall in any one market
without impairing the relative status of
the workers there. A general rise in prices
is a neutral and universal method of reducing
real wages, the only method in a
decentralized and uncontrolled economy.
Inflation would not be needed, we may
infer, if by government compulsion, economy-
wide bargaining, or social compact,
all money wage rates could be scaled down
together.

Keynes apparently meant that relative
wages are the arguments in labor supply
functions. But Alchian (pp. 27-52 in Phelps
et al.) and other theorists of search activity
have offered a somewhat different
interpretation, namely that workers whose
money wages are reduced will quit their
jobs to seek employment in other markets
where they think, perhaps mistakenly,
that wages remain high.

Keynes's explanation of money wage
stickiness is plausible and realistic. But two
related analytical issues have obscured the
message. Can there be involuntary unemployment
in an equilibrium, a proper, fullfledged
neoclassical equilibrium? Does the
labor supply behavior described by Keynes
betray "money illusion"? Keynes gave a
loud yes in answer to the first question,
and this seems at first glance to compel an
affirmative answer to the second.
An economic theorist can, of course,
commit no greater crime than to assume
money illusion. Comparative statics is a