and life benefits" bought per dollar spent.
The ideal of equilibrium then suggests redistributing
expenditures, if needed, in order
to maximize total benefits from the
given expenditure for protection. Valuations
of health or life that have a modicum
of public approval could result from such
redistribution. Note that these valuations,
also called shadowv prices, are in efTect set by
the budgetary decision makers, whether
they are aware of it or not.
After such redistribution if called for, the
calculation of money values of health and
life registers what in good practice we consistently
spend to save a life. The process
recognizes that, disturbing as it is to our
sensibilities, society is being compelled by
the facts of technology and behavior to set
up equivalences between lives of unidentified
people and bundles of goods and services
implicitly of the same market or
shadow value - --thus bracketing contemporary
lives together with current goods
and services in the same category of exchangeables.


The examples given so far concern small
to moderate risks affecting small to moderate
numbers of people, less than 100 at a
time, say. Moreover, the time intervals between
the decision to commit funds for the
reduction of risks, the actual expenditure of
these funds, and the reaping of benefits
therefrom are moderate, less than twenty
years, say. Finally, the problems are mostly
local or national, not international in scope.
The long-run choices between energy
technology mixes are different in these respects.
By a gradual shift from oil and gas
to coal, fossil fuels can remain a principal
source of energy for countries with abundant
resources of coal, especially the United
States, the USSR, and China, for a long
time to come. Intensive current discussion
with regard to this option concerns the possible
climatic effects of the increase in the
atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide
caused by continued large-scale combustion
of fossil fuels or their derivatives,
alongside with world-wide deforestation.
Among the large-scale effects held possible
are an increase in average global
temperature, entailing dislocation of agriculture
depending on how each region is
affected, and an increase in the level of the
oceans due to the melting of polar ice not
previously floating. The present state of
knowledge is not such as to be ready for an
assessment of these risks. New hypotheses
and observations appear regularly in the
pages of Science and other journals. So I
would describe this problem as involving an
unknown risk to a large number of people.
If current estimates of the capital cost of
central station solar power are realistic, the
principal alternative to fossil fuels for bulk
power generation is nuclear power. I am
not qualified to even comment on the reactor
safety and waste disposal problems. I
assume, however, that the developers of
these technologies would classify these
problems in terms of very small risks to
substantial numbers of people. Perhaps this
leaves as the principal concern the difficulty
of keeping industrial and weapons use of
nuclear materials apart. Since on this one
we are all groping in the dark, I feel I should
describe this aspect of nuclear technology
as an unknown risk to a very large number
of people.

I cannot see my way through to a calculus
of the value of human lives in large
numbers, that would help clarify issues of
the scope of those just discussed although
estimates of numbers of lives at risk are
and will remain important. These are
basically problems for judgment, even
though the need for making these judgments
will weigh hard on the people called
upon to make them. But supposing I should
be wrong, let me point to one apparent
paradox to be faced in any attempt to
bring a calculus of the shadow price of
human life to bear on problems with a long
time span.

Suppose one accepts as an ethical principle
that, in balancing risks to human life
in the present and in the future, equal numbers
of lives should receive equal weight.
This would make the present value of the
future human life independent of the time
at which it is lived. However, we have seen
that as long as capital saturation is not attained,