plane, as in Figure 1. A consumer lives at point
A, (0,0), if neither variety is purchased, at point
B, (pl,zl), if the low-quality variety is most
preferred, and at point C, (Ph,Zh), if high quality
is chosen. High-quality goods must sell for
higher prices than low-quality goods, or else
low quality is dominated and disappears from
the market. Thus, higher z is always associated
with larger p if both Zh and z, are actually
traded. Given that some variety is purchased, a
consumer chooses Zh if the benefits of its additional
quality exceed its additional cost. Once
having decided on the choice of variety, the
consumer decides whether to purchase it or do
without.
The first part of the problem is equivalent to
choosing the maximum between u(y - Ph, Zh)
and u(y - pl, zl), where y is income. The
added cost of high quality is l\p = Ph - Pl- Its
added benefit is how much more the buyer is
willing to pay for it, A\O, and is defined as a
compensating variation:
(1) U(y - pI - AO, Zh) = U(y - pi, Z1)-
AXO is the money premium a person would pay
for Zh when the lower-quality item z, is available
at price p,. The optimal choice is Zh if
AXO > Ph - p, and z, otherwise. The second part of
the problem, whether or not to purchase the
good at all, is another cost-benefit comparison.
Define 0 as the compensating variation that
equates the utility of not purchasing anything to
that obtained from the best possible variety:
(2)
u(y,O)
= max{u(y - 0 - AO, Zh), U(y - 0, Z1)}.
The consumer does not purchase any z if both
0 < p, and 0 + AO < PhThis
can be neatly described diagrammatically
with a spatial bidfunction 0 (z), defined as
the amount a person with income y will pay for
various varieties at some constant utility index:
(3) u(y - 0(z), z) = constant.
0(z) is an indifference curve between money
and the measure of quality z. From (3), its
derivative a 0/az = uzJuC, is the marginal rate
of substitution between z and c. This is positive
and 0 (z) is upward sloping. Diminishing
marginal rate of substitution implies that
0"(z) < 0: the marginal willingness to pay
for additional quality is decreasing. The
curves labeled 0' in Figure 1 depict indifference
curves for three different kinds of
buyers. Consumers whose tastes look like 00 do
not purchase the differentiated product at all
because the indifference curve through (0,0) lies
above the available price-quality combinations
for z. Analogously, those whose tastes look like
01 purchase z, and those whose tastes are more
like 02 buy Zh- Choices of differentiated varieties
are nicely ordered by the intensity of preferences
for quality in this example.
Supply decisions of sellers are similar. The
benefit of selling a variety is its market price.
Production is profitable if price exceeds production
costs of at least some sellers. Parallel with
bid functions, these choices are depicted by a
spatial offer function p( z)-the locus of pricequality
pairs that result in the same profit. 'p( c)
is the supply price of quality z for that seller.
Since higher-quality goods are more costly to
produce, 'p'(z) > 0. Offer curves are increasing
and convex functions of z. Producers either
specialize their production in distinct varieties
or produce several of them in a product line.
Costs and production conditions, indivisibilities,
the nature of competition, and competitors'
costs factor into these outcomes. Figure 1 depicts
a case of specialization. The offer function
labeled Sp1 refers to a seller with comparative