DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
second is the extent to which additional work,
and so additional payroll taxes, increase the
measure of lifetime earnings and so add to
benefits.
For an average worker at ages 62 and 63,
Social Security had a roughly zero marginal tax
for the average worker when the age for full
benefits was 65.49 With the increase in the age
for full benefits there will be a small tax at these
ages. While implicit taxes used to be much
larger above the age for full benefits, the retirement
test has been eliminated for those ages.
With differences in life expectancy, a zero tax
on an average worker implies that some workers
are taxed and some are subsidized by the pres-
ence of the retirement test.50
The retirement test has two effects. One is to
raise (delayed) monthly benefits for those continuing
to work. To the extent that a worker
would have consumed out of benefits received
while still working, the delay in the start of
benefits raises later consumption (for both the
worker and possibly a surviving spouse) since
more is saved. This is advantageous to the extent
that consumption falls too much after retirement.
51 The combination of a delay and
increase in benefits is also redistribution across
workers based on life expectancy along the lines
discussed above. On the other hand, benefit
ineligibility while continuing to work discourages
work for those not fully valuing their increased
later benefits and those with shorter life
expectancy. Empirical estimates find that the
overall labor supply effect is modest, suggesting
that the increase in monthly benefits effect is
more important. The retirement test also helps
49 Courtney Coile and Jonathan Gruber (2001). The mar-
ginal tax reflects the loss of a year of benefits, the increase
in benefits thereafter, the payment of the payroll tax, and the
increase in benefits from an increase in AIME, since
earnings in a late year are likely to be among the top 35.
For example, of the Health and Retirement Survey sam-
ple of those born in 1931, over one-third of men and
four-fifths of women had fewer than 35 years of positive
earnings when entering the year in which they turned 61.
Without a tax on continued work, increasing the age at
which benefits can first be claimed, without other
changes, would not save money for Social Security on a
permanent basis.
50 Of course, these earnings are also subject to the annual
income tax.
51 Also valuable is that the higher monthly benefits come
as an annuity while savings from benefits would not provide
this insurance.
with the risk in earnings trajectories that comes
from how opportunities to earn (and disutilities)
develop toward the end of a career. The retirement
test addresses that risk to the extent that
there is taxation on continued work and those
continuing to work are less needy on average
than those who stop working earlier.52 Thus I
conclude that the retirement test does distort
labor supply, but that distortion is more than
offset by the gains from improved lifetime consumption
allocations and increased insurance.
Limiting the range of ages at which the retirement
test applies makes sense. Otherwise
some of those working to very advanced ages
would have replacement rates above 100 percent
and, if liquidity-constrained, would prefer
to have part of benefits while still working.
Currently the age for the end of the retirement
test is the age for full benefits. I am not aware of
any analysis of the optimal choice of an age for
the end of the retirement test.
B. Labor Supply at Younger Ages
I have focused on the retirement decision
since elasticities here are larger than those with
earlier labor supply decisions. But younger
workers pay payroll taxes and anticipate an
increase in benefits once they retire as a consequence
of the earnings that were subject to tax.
The effect on labor supply is relevant for choosing
the size of a mandatory retirement income
system. This incentive depends on the perceived
link between taxed earnings and retirement (and
disability) benefits. While those nearing retirement
age often gather information on the workings
of the system and seek advice on the
advantages of different timing of retirement,
younger workers are not well informed.53 Some
52 1 note that in a model with homogeneous life expect-
ancy, if we have fully rational workers and if the increase in
benefits implies an implicit tax, there is an increase in
insurance insofar as early retirement is a consequence of an
adverse realization of opportunities. This is a familiar optimal
insurance result-that one taxes observable variables in
the states where they signal a lower marginal utility of
consumption.
53 Information is also supplied in annual statements
which give individual benefit levels for different retirement
ages. Someone anticipating no benefits at all might see no
link (although inconsistent anticipations about the future are
common). Presumably that would change with a reform that
was widely perceived as restoring long-run sustainability.
VOL. 94 NO. 1
13