dedication to minimum government intervention,
small budgets, reliance on rules
rather than authority, and price stability.
Contrasting correlations appear in the
Keynesian package. So outsiders can be
excused for slipping into the fallacy of
association and attributing the split to
our unresolved analytical conflicts rather
than to divergent evaluations of social
priorities and competing philosophies of
government. These associational chains are
not linked together by any inexorable
logic in part, they seem to be an accident
of birth as in the case of the Chicago twins
of monetarism and laissez-faire rules. A
belief in the supremacy of monetary over
fiscal tools could quite logically go hand-inhand
with avid interventionism. But this
escapes the jaundiced eye of the outside
observer, who takes the ideological lineup
as further evidence that economics is
riven to its core.
Five, there is an ironic but substantial
inverse correlation between the degree of
consensus among economists and the degree
of public acceptance of their findings.
Thus, in the macro-economic sphere of stabilization
policy, where debate and disputes
among economists flourish, their imprint
on public policy is undeniable. But in
the considerably more peaceful realm of
microeconomics and allocative. efficiency
-where a reliable analytical apparatus
coupled with solid quantitative work, especially
on costs and benefits, has led the
great majority of disinterested economists
to an agreed diagnosis and prescriptionthe
policy box score shows few hits, fewer
runs, and lots of runners lef t on base.
Economists widely, in some cases almost
uniformly, favor tougher antitrust policy,
freer trade, deregulation of transportation,
pollution taxes in place of most prohibitions,
and tax reform to remove income tax
shelters. They oppose fair trade laws, restrictive
labor and management practices,
distortive zoning laws and building codes,
import quotas, ceilings on interest rates,
maritime subsidies, and pure (or impure)
pork barrel projects.
Granted, the diffuse and inchoate consumer
interest has been no match for
the sharply focussed, articulate, and wellfinanced
efforts of producer groups. But
the economist is beginning to pick up some
allies. Public interest groups are increasingly
giving focus and force to the consumer
and general public interest. And the
march of events is providing some windfalls:
Among the apples that have dropped
in our laps are flexible exchange rates, the
dethroning of agricultural price supports,
inroads on import quotas, and moves to
end percentage depletion. Under the pressure
of virulent inflation, government actions
that erode productivity and boost
costs and prices are being subjected to new
and searching scrutiny. So perhaps, on
these micro-economic issues where economists
sing in reasonably close harmony,
the outside world will no longer quite tune
us out. In macro-economic policy, where
cacaphony prevails, we can be sure that
the world will tune us in.
It may also be useful to draw attention
especially the attention of those who
interpret us to the public-to certain other
misperceptions and roadblocks that thwart
good economics and tend to put economists
in bad repute.
First, much of our economic analysis
and the uncommon sense growing out of it
fly in the face of "common sense," for
example: that budget deficits need not
spell inflation, nor national debt a burden
on our grandchildren; that thriftiness can
be a mixed virtue; that while exploding oil
prices inflate costs, they deflate demand;
that in an overheated economy, greater
taxes can be the lesser evil; and so on.
Behind every false dictate of common
sense lies a primitive and misbegotten
economic theory-and for most of our
pains to correct it, we can expect to get