Forty years ago economists discovered the
"residual." The main message of this literature,
that growth in conventional inputs
explains little of the observed growth in
output, was first articulated by Solomon
Fabricant in 1954 and emphasized further
by Moses Abramovitz (1956), John Kendrick
(1956), and Robert Solow (1957).1 The pioneers
of this subject were quite clear that
this finding of large residuals was an embarrassment,
at best "a measure of our ignorance"
(Abramovitz, 1956 p. 11). But by
attributing it to technical change and other
sources of improved efficiency they turned
it, perhaps inadvertently, from a gap in our
understanding into an intellectual asset, a
method for measuring "technical change."
Still, it was not a comfortable situation, and
a subsequent literature developed trying to
"explain" this residual, or more precisely, to
attribute it to particular sources (Griliches
1960, 1963a,b, 1964; Edward Denison, 1962;
Dale Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967). The
consensus of that literature was that, while
measurement errors may play a significant
role in such numbers, they could not really
explain them away. The major sources of
productivity growth were seen as coming
from improvements in the quality of labor
and capital and from other, not otherwise
measured, sources of efficiency and technical
change, the latter being in turn the
product of formal and informal R&D investments
by individuals, firms, and governments,
and the largely unmeasured contributions
of science and other spillovers. The
prescription of additional investments in education,
in science, and in industrial R&D
followed from this reading of history as did
also the hope and expectation that the recently
observed rates of "technical change"
would continue into the future.
This general view of the sources of growth
was put into doubt by the events of the
1970's and 1980's. Beginning in 1974 (or
perhaps already in 1968) productivity growth
slowed down significantly in the United
States and abroad, and it has not fully recovered
yet, at least as far as national aggregates
are concerned. The many explanations
that were offered for these events were not
very convincing (see e.g., Denison, 1979;
Martin Baily and Robert Gordon, 1988;
Griliches, 1988). As time went on and the
direct effects of the energy-price shocks
wore off but the expected recovery did not
come or came only weakly, more voices
were heard arguing that the slowdown might
not be temporary; that the energy-price
shocks just revealed what was already there
-a decline in the underlying trend of technical
change in the world economy; that the
growth opportunities that had opened up in
the late 1930's and had been interrupted by
World War II have been exhausted, reflecting
perhaps the completion of an even
longer cycle, going back to the beginnings of
this century (see e.g., Alfred Kleinknecht,
1987; Gordon, 1993a). Even more ominously,
the slowdown was blamed on diminishing
returns to science and technology in
general and the onset of widespread socioeconomic
sclerosis (see e.g., William Nordhaus,
1972, 1989; Mancur Olsen, 1982;