VI
So much for the past. We must now try to
look ahead. What general view of the future
is it sensible to entertain? And what are its
implications?
Since our understanding of the productivity
retardation of the last dozen years is so
clouded, conjecture about the future must
be still more fuzzy. True, the negative impact
of the recent big influx of inexperienced
young workers is due to be reversed.
In looking ahead, however, more basic questions
need to be addressed. No one, indeed,
ought to doubt the persistence of some
substantial continuity in what Solomon
Fabricant has identified as
the basic factors underlying economic
growth in the United States: the tastes
and preferences of the American people,
the economic opportunities and
alternatives open to them, the social
framework within which they live and
work together, and the relations of the
United States with the rest of the
world. Different assumptions would be
contrary to all experience and could
only lead to wild speculation. [So he
concludes] The trend of national output
per worker-hour will ... continue to
be upward. [p. 1]
I agree; but, as Fabricant also asks, how
fast will the trend line rise? A "substantial
degree of continuity" is not the same as
ironclad fixity, and much of this talk has
already pointed to some change in
Fabricant's basic factors. Within the country,
preferences and goals have changed in
the degree to which concern for income
security, equality of opportunity, environmental
protection, and consumer and worker
safety sways votes and, to some degree, personal
behavior. Corresponding to these shifts
in tastes and concerns, the "social framework
within which we live and work together"
has been recast. The government
has come to play a larger role in shaping the
"economic opportunities and alternatives"
open to us-while imposing burdens on our
growth potential whose weight we can now
suspect but cannot yet clearly assess. Partly
because of higher incomes, partly because
of changes in industrial and labor market
organization, and partly because of government
regulation and income support, there
has been a decline in market flexibility-in
the responsiveness of prices and wages to
the balance of supply and demand, and
of people's own responsiveness to price
changes-the implications of which Tibor
Scitovsky sketched last year.
Our relations with the rest of the world
have also changed in ways which I believe
are dominantly, but not entirely, unfavorable
to U.S. growth prospects. The economic
rise of Europe and Japan has, indeed,
brought those countries to the technological
after 1973, namely, the great increase in the price of
energy and the rapid, accelerating, and erratic inflation.
Our mixed economy is then implicated to the extent
that it works to sustain, if not generate, inflation, and
to the extent that our welfare concerns impede the
formulation and execution of an energy policy consistent
with the maintenance and rapid rise of measured
productivity. Continuing work may well clear up
these questions about the responsibility of public policy
for the current retardation, but, for the time being, we
have to live with uncertainty.
The puzzle is still further confused by the experience
of the continental European countries. Their fiscal
burdens are on the whole heavier than those of the
United States, yet their productivity retardation does
not generally begin before the oil shock of 1973-74
and the aggravated inflationary disorders that followed.
One must, therefore, ask whether the longer persistence
of high European productivity growth rates did not
reflect a difference in "cyclical" experience. Unlike the
United States, they did not generally enjoy a cyclically
induced intensification of resource use in the early
1960's and, therefore, a cyclical acceleration of productivity
growth. They had no occasion, therefore, to suffer
a cyclical retardation in the latter 1960's, as the United
States may have done as our economy approached
capacity utilizatidn. We may also ask whether the
Europeans were more resistant to the incentive effects
of heavy taxes and large transfers because of the special
factors supporting their great postwar growth
booms; or perhaps because their tax and transfer systems
are designed differently than ours; or perhaps
because of still other matters that differentiate their
economies and societies from our own. Or is it the case
that what I have referred to as the "suspect factors"-
other than inflation and monetary disorder itself-have
little to do with the observed retardations of productivity
growth? Clearly, the theoretical and empirical issues
embodied in these questions call for our very urgent
attention.