Sebastian Edwards (1993) and Anne 0.
Krueger (1985, 1997)]. Just as inflation has
costs beyond the area under the demand curve
for real cash balances, so protectionism seems
to have burdens that go beyond the standard
triangle-trapezoid-rectangle measures of the
costs of trade distortions. There are at least two
quite natural explanations: first, that openness
helps grease the wheels of the international
transfer of more modern technologies, and
second, that firms that may once have relaxed
in ease and comfort behind high protective
barriers end up having to sink or swim once
forced to compete in a much more openeconomy
setting. Under either explanation,
trade liberalization opens up new paths of real
cost reduction, thus providing additional impetus
to economic growth.
(e) The recent wave of privatizations
among both developed and developing economies
may have important effects in enabling
real cost reductions that otherwise might have
been delayed, or not have happened at all. It
is, I believe, fair to say that in most countries
state-owned enterprises operate under a series
of constraints that seriously get in the way of
real cost minimization in a comparative-static
sense and of real cost reduction in a dynamic
sense. These constraints sometimes limit the
salaries of executives, sometimes impose
onerous conditions on the firm as it employs
lower-skilled workers, often limit the capacity
of the firm to shut down inefficient lines of
production, and almost always make it difficult
to fire workers, etc. To my mind, however,
perhaps the worst attribute of state-owned enterprises
is the ethos that often evolves inside
of them-an ethos where middle managers
are well advised to "leave well enough
alone," "not rock the boat," and "not invite
trouble." This ethos flies in the face of a vision
of the growth process that gives a huge role to
the search for real cost reductions at the grassroots
level, and that recognizes the tumult that
accompanies "creative destruction" in all its
forms. I thus must applaud the contemporary
trend toward privatization. If I harbor any
qualms in this connection, they concern the
degree to which many privatizations have been
carried out in too much haste and with too little
care, often motivated by purely fiscal considerations
rather than by a general search for
economic efficiency. This nlay have led to gratuitous
transfers of wealth in some instances
and to the planting of newly private enterprises
in soil that was not properly prepared (e.g.,
still lacking a sound regulatory framework for
electricity rates, or intelligent rules promoting
competitiveness in at least some aspects of
telecommunications, etc.)
(f) One cannot complete a list like this
without mentioning something that most of us
simply take for granted-a sound legal and
institutional framework in which individuals
are protected against arbitrary incursions on
their property and other economic rights. This
very basic point-recently much emphasized
by Douglass C. North ( 1990), Robert J.
Barrow and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1994),
Mancuir Olson, Jr. ( 1996), and Barro ( 1997 )
is at least potentially a vital element for a sustained
process of successful economic growth.
If it is true that spurts of growth have sometimes
occurred in the absence of such a framework,
it is also true that most cases of
sustained growth over long periods of time
have benefitted from a sound institutional and
legal environment.
(g) Somewhat related to the above is the
element of political consensus concerning the
broad outlines of economic policy. We have
learned from experience that very admirable
policy reforms can take place, yet end up having
little effect. This can happen because a
new government comes in and reverses the reform.
But it can also happen because people
fear that a new government will come in and
reverse the reforms later on. At the moment,
the Chilean economy is one of the jewels of
economic growth (and general economic success)
in Latin America. Many people point to
the thoroughness and pervasiveness of Chile's
economic reforms over the last two decades or
so. But not so many point to the fact that the
reform package has remained essentially intact
through several changes of ministers, and even
more i-mportant, through two presidential elections
in which the winners came from the opposite
side of the political fence from the
government that initiated the reforms. The
confidence in the economic order of things instilled
by this sequential endorsement of the
basic framework of economic policy has to be