Rohatyn (1984) to say that the American
century lasted only twenty years. The Nixon
shock of 1973 in cutting off soya bean exports
to Japan-a significant harm to an ally
for a small gain to this country-was the act
of a bad Samaritan. The import surcharge of
the same year may have been required to
move the dollar out from the position of the
nth currency when only n -1 countries are
free to fix their exchange rates, but it would
have been possible to start with the later
attempt at cooperation that resulted in the
Smithsonian agreement. This is especially
true when so much of the case against the
1971 exchange rate was the result of the
easy-money policy of the Federal Reserve
System under Chairman Arthur Burns, at a
time when the Bundesbank was tightening its
money market/go-it-alone policies of both
banks that flooded the world with dollars.
The present U.S. administration claims to
be working for open trade and does fairly
well in resisting appeals for protection. The
positive push for a Reagan round of trade
liberalization in services and agriculture,
however, is in pursuit of a national and not
an international public good. The regime in
capital movements-the World Bank, the regional
development banks and that in-lastresort
lending orchestrated by the IMFseems
to be working, with bridging loans and
an ad hoc purchase of oil from Mexico for
the U.S. stockpile in 1982 when the IMF
finds itself unable to move fast enough. But
there are signs of dissension that may spell
trouble. The June 1985 bridging loan for
Argentina was declined by Germany and
Switzerland on the grounds that Argentina
had not been sufficiently austere and that its
problems were not a threat to the world
financial system (New York Times, June 15,
1985, p. 1). The Japanese contribution,
moreover, was said to have been small, although
no figures were given.
What I worry about mostly is exchange
policy and macroeconomic coordination. The
U.S. Treasury under Donald Regan was
committed to the policy of neglect, presumably
benign, but in any event ideological.
And the commitment to consultative macroeconomic
policies in annual summit meetings
of seven heads of state has become a shadow
play, a dog-and-pony show, a series of photo
opportunities-whatever you choose to call
them-with ceremony substituted for substance.
The 1950's and 1960's, when serious
discussions were held at the lowly level of
Working Party No. 3 of the O.E.C.D., were
superior because the United States and other
countries took them seriously.
I am a realist when it comes to regimes. It
seems to me that the momentum set in motion
by a hegemonic power-if we must use
that expression, I prefer to think of leadership
or responsibility-runs down pretty
quickly unless it is sustained by powerful
commitment. The IMF and World Bank were
agreed at Bretton Woods largely as a result
of the U.S. Treasury: the forms were international,
the substance was dictated by a single
country (Armand van Dormel, 1978). In the
early days of the IMF, Frank Southard told
me, if the United States made no proposal,
nothing happened. Today the same is true of
the European Economic Community: unless
Germany and France see eye to eye, which is
infrequent, nothing happens. Proposals of
great technical appeal from individuals or
small countries are not welcomed as the preparatory
phases of the World Economic
Conference of 1933 demonstrated (see my
1973 book, pp. 210-14). There needs to be
positive leadership, backed by resources and
a readiness to make some sacrifice in the
international interest.
The leadership role is not applauded. When
the United States accused the rest of the
world of being free riders, Andrew Shonfield
countercharged the United States of being a
" hard rider," " hustling and bullying the
Europeans," "kicking over chairs when it did
not get its way" (1976, pp. 86, 88, 102).
Furnishing the dollar to the world as international
money has brought the United States
an accusation of extracting seignorage, although
the facts that the dollar is not a
monopoly currency and that foreign holdings
earn market rates of interest deflect that
criticism in sophisticated quarters.
Neglect can verge on sabotage. When the
European central banks collaborated to hold
the dollar down at the end of February 1985,
the conspicuous failure of the United States
to participate on a significant scale encouraged
speculators not to cover long positions.
A former trader for the Federal Reserve