by other motives. Presumably, the altruism
per child is negatively related to the number
of children, so that an additional child lowers
the utility per child to parents in the same
way as (please excuse the analogy) an additional
car lowers the utility per car.
Such altruism is easily grafted onto the
neoclassical utility function by letting parents'
utility depend on their own life-cycle
consumption and separately on their degree
of altruism per child, the number of children,
and the utility of each child. This formulation
has the important implication that preference
for parents' relative to children's consumption
(so-called time preference) is not
exogenous but rises as the number of children
increases.

The resources available to parents from
the capital they inherit and labor earnings
are spent either on own consumption, on the
costs of rearing children, or on transfers to
children of human and other capital. Since
child rearing is time intensive, the cost of
rearing children is positively related to the
value of parents' time. Income per capita
would rise between the parents' and the
child's generations if the total capital bequeathed
to each child exceeds the capital
inherited by each parent.
Parents choose optimal values of their own
consumption, the number of children, and
capital transferred to each child while taking
into account the cost of rearing children and
the dependence of their utility on the utility
of children. This analysis has many implications
for the behavior of fertility that Robert
Barro and I explore elsewhere (see 1987 and
1988). Here I concentrate on a few that alter
implications of the neoclassical model about
capital accumulation and growth.
If the number of children demanded by
the typical family is positively related to the
income of parents (the Malthusian assumptions)
, or at least if it is not strongly negatively
related, then this model also has stable
steady-state levels of the capital-labor ratio
and per capita income. But these steady
states depend on variables that change the
demand for children.

One example is the consequences of an
extended but temporary decline in income
and productivity-perhaps due to the disorganization
induced by a lengthy depression.
In the neoclassical model this has no
long-run effect on either per capita or aggregate
income. In our modified model an
extended decline in productivity can permanently
lower aggregate income because birth
rates may fall when productivity, wages, and
interest rates fall. Recall the sharp decline in
birth rates during the Great Depression.
Just over a decade age, Barro (1974)
showed that a dose of family economics
radically alters traditional conclusions about
the effects of budget deficits on private savings.
For example, deficits to finance Social
Security payments tax future generations to
support the elderly. Altruistic parents who
leave bequests to their children do not seek
an intergeneration redistribution of incomes,
so they would increase their bequests to offset
the effect on children of future taxes. If these
families are common, Social Security payments
and other public expenditures financed
by taxes on future generations would not
have much effect on private savings. This is
the so-called Ricardian equivalence theorem.
A larger dose of family economics gives
more radical implications in some respects
but also has more conventional implications
for the relation between Social Security and
savings. Various comments on Ricardian
equivalence emphasize that some families do
not leave bequests; I will discuss these families
in Section IV. Development economists
have long recognized that parents value
children who provide support during old age.
A Social Security system that replaces child
support of parents with public support raises
the net cost of children to parents (not to
society) since they are no longer as useful to
elderly parents. As a result, a Social Security
system tends to reduce the demand for
children. Social Security also reduces the
demand for children by parents who do not
receive support but provide bequests. The
net cost of children to these parents also
increases when they raise bequests to offset
the effect of Social Security taxes on children.
For reasons given earlier, a lower demand
for children raises the capital bequeathed to
each child. Therefore, Social Security and
other public transfers between generations
would raise private savings per child, and as