heftily, given the low money demand elasticity;
but most expenditures depend on long-term
rates, which generally respond but gradually,
and the demand response is generally also gradual.
Furthermore, while this response is building
up, multiplier and accelerator mechanisms work
toward amplifying the shock. Finally, the classical
mechanism the change in real money
supply through prices has an even longer lag
because of the sluggish response of wages to
excess demand.
These interferences are supported by simulations
with econometric models like the MPS.
Isolating, first, the working of the Hicksian
mechanism by holding prices constant, we find
that a 1 percent demand shock, say a rise in real
exports, produces an impact effect on aggregate
output which is barely more than 1 percent, rises
to a peak of only about 2 percent a year later, and
then declines slowly toward a level somewhat
over 1.5 percent.
Taking into account the wage price mechanism
hardly changes the picture for the first
year because of its inertia. Thereafter, however,
it becomes increasingly effective so that a year
later the real response is back at the impact level,
and by the end of the third year the shock has
been fully offset (thereafter output oscillates
around zero in a damped fashion). Money income,
on the other hand, reaches a peak of over
2.5, and then only by the middle of the second
year. It declines thereafter, and tends eventually
to oscillate around a positive value because normally,
a demand shock requires eventually a
change in interest rates and hence in velocity
and money income.
These results, which are broadly confirmed by
other econometric models, certainly do not support
the view of a highly unstable economy in
which fiscal policy has powerful and everlasting
effects. But neither do they support the monetarist
view of a highly stable economy in which
shocks hardly make a ripple and the effects of
fiscal policy are puny and fast vanishing.
C. The Monetarist Evidence and the
St. Louis Quandary
Monetarists, however, have generally been
inclined to question this evidence. They countered
at first with tests bearing on the stability of
velocity and the insignificance of the multiplier,
which, however, as indicated in my criticism
with Albert Ando (1965), must be regarded as
close to worthless. More recently, several authors
at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
(Leonall Andersen, Keith Carlson, Jerry Lee
Jordan) have suggested that instead of deriving
multipliers from the analytical or numerical
solution of an econometric model involving a
large number of equations, any one of which
may be questioned, they should be estimated
directly through "reduced form" equations by
relating the change in income to current and
lagged changes in some appropriate measure of
the money supply and of fiscal impulses.
The results of the original test, using the
current and but four lagged values of M1 and of
high Employment Federal Expenditure as measures
of monetary and fiscal impulses, turned out
to be such as to fill a monetarist's heart with joy.
The contribution of money, not only current but
also lagged, was large and the coefficients implied
a not unreasonable effect of the order of
magnitude of the velocity of circulation, though
somewhat higher. On the other hand, the estimated
coefficients of the fiscal variables seemed
to support fully the monetarists' claim that their
impact was both small and fleeting: the effect
peaked in but two quarters and was only around
one, and disappeared totally by the fourth quarter
following the change.
These results were immediately attacked on
the ground that the authors had used the wrong
measure of monetary and fiscal actions, and it
was shown that the outcome was somewhat
sensitive to alternative measures; however, the
basic nature of the results did not change, at least
qualitatively. In particular, the outcome does not
differ materially, at least for the original period
up to 1969, if one replaces high employment outlays
with a variable that might be deemed more
suitable, like government expenditure on goods
and services, plus exports.
These results must be acknowledged as disturbing
for nonmonetarists, for there is little
question that movements in government purchases
and exports are a major source of demand
disturbances; if econometric model estimates of