The difference between population growth rates
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was
due primarily to the advancement of knowledge
and technology that permitted much more rapid
reductions in mortality in the twentieth century,
even in the world's poorest countries. There
was rather limited progress in reducing death
rates until the midpoint of the nineteenth century
in Sweden and significantly later for England.
The basic environmental problems of
unclean water, inadequate sanitation, and childhood
infectious diseases still took a major toll
until the early years of the twentieth century.
The infant mortality rate in New York City in
1890 was 264 per 1,000 births, more than double
the rate of 121 in rural areas (Weber, 1899).
The rates of decline in fertility in the developing
world were greater than in the developed
world for the periods under consideration. However,
the crude birth rates in the developing
world started their decline from a much higher
level than existed in the developed world in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The crude
birth rates in Sweden and England in the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries were in the
range of 35 to 37 per thousand population while
the averages for low-income countries in 1960
was 48 and the average for middle-income
countries was 40 (World Bank, 1980). Consequently,
the birth rate in the low-income countries
needed to fall by a third just to reach the
level prevailing in Western Europe at the beginning
of the Industrial Revolution. The more
rapid growth of population in today's developing
world was not due to increases in fertility
but to the combined effects of high initial rates
of fertility and rapid declines in mortality.
IX. Wide Distribution of Benefits of Knowledge
In recent years a great deal of concern has
been expressed about the lack of convergence of
per capita income among countries and increasing
inequality within countries. The emphasis
on increased income inequality has left the impression
that most measures of well-being have
become much more unequal as well. The use of
differences in per capita incomes as measures of
either satisfaction or well-being assumes that
these measures are proportional to income, a
conclusion that cannot be supported.
Contrary to views that are widely held, for
several important measures of well-being there
has been great improvement, both absolutely
and relatively, in the lives of the people of the
low-income developing countries.9 The benefits
of the growth of knowledge have not been restricted
to the countries responsible for the advances
in knowledge but have spread
throughout most of the world. And they would
have spread more quickly and more widely if
the policies of many governments had been
more supportive of economic growth and
development.
Improvements in the conditions of life in
terms of nutrition, infant mortality, and life expectancy,
have occurred at a much faster pace in
the developing countries in the twentieth century
than in the developed countries in the nineteenth
century. These improvements have
occurred with much larger populations and
greater population densities. The population of
the developing countries at the end of the twentieth
century is 4.84 billion, an increase of 350
percent in a century. This compares to the increase
in Europe in the nineteenth century of 85
percent. But not only did the improvements in
well-being occur more rapidly during similar
periods of economic development, but with respect
to several very important variables the
gaps narrowed significantly during the twentieth
century and especially during the last half of
that century.
century at a time of rapidly improving real wages is
certainly due in part to the very rapid growth in the
percentage of the population living in towns where
the death rates were high. ... Better wages in the
same economic and social environment may reduce
mortality, but since better wages may also mean
moving to a less healthy environment, there was a
negative rather than positive relationship between
wealth and health.
9 For the countries that moved from low- to middle- or to
high-income levels in the past half century, the improvements
in terms of nutrition, infant mortality rates, and life
expectancies have been significantly greater than what has
occurred in countries that have remained low income. South
Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong are examples. Their
infant mortality rates ranged from 4 to 11 per thousand in
1995 and life expectancy at birth from 72 to 79 years
(World Bank, 1997), approaching the levels in Europe and
North America. In 1950 their incomes were in the range of
the current low-income countries.