more diverse and complex world outside our
borders. Knowledge of how the domestic
economy works and interacts with the rest of
the world is imperfect. Economists keep
coming up with ingeneous theories, but they
have a hard time testing them. Data are
inadequate and controlled experimentation
nearly impossible. Modeling has greatly
enhanced our understanding of the past,
but shows few visible signs of improving
the reliability of macroeconomic prediction.
Forecasting even for short periods remains
an uncertain art in which neither economists
nor politicians can have much confidence.
Many of the most sophisticated and realistic
members of the profession, conscious of
all these difficulties, have abandoned the attempt
to advise governments on policies
in favor of the more manageable tasks of
adding to the knowledge base. This may be
understandable, but it deprives the economic
policy debate of the input of some very good
minds and runs the risk of leaving the job of
interacting with the political arena disproportionately
to those with strong ideological
views.

I. Fragmentation of the Economic Policy Process
The pluralism of economics pales beside
the pluralism of the political system that
policy-minded economists aspire to assist.
Even if one leaves aside the complexities of
federalism, the process by which national
economic policy evolves in Washington is so
fragmented and complicated that it is almost
impossible to explain to the uninitiated how
it is supposed to work, let along how it does
work.

A well-founded distrust of despots led our
forefathers not only to opt for representative
democracy, but to divide power among
the executive and legislative and judicial
branches, and between the House and the
Senate. On matters of taxing and spending,
they were especially protective of the power
of the people's representatives, making it
clear that while the president could propose
taxing and spending, the ultimate authority
lies with the Congress, subject only to presidential
veto. This divided power creates a
built-in hurdle to making and carrying out
fiscal policy. The hurdle is low when the
president is articulating a policy that has
broad support in the country and in the
Congress. It can lead to erratic shifts of
policy when the president is indecisive, and
to deadlock when the president is leading
in a direction in which the public and its
elected representatives do not wish to go.
Deadlocks are rare, but can be serious. The
failure to reduce the huge structural budget
deficit of the mid-1980's largely reflects the
fact that the president's solution-drastic
reduction of the federal role in the domestic
economy-does not command broad popular
support.

The separation of powers between the
Congress and the president is basic to our
system of government and probably worth
the price of occasional deadlock. The difficulties
of making economic policy, however,
are strongly compounded by the propensity
of our pluralistic society to diffuse
power and decision-making authority both
within the executive branch and within Congress.
With respect to taxing and spending
policy, for example, the simple notion that
the president proposes and the Congress disposes
is greatly complicated by the fragmentation
of power within each branch. Moreover,
periodic efforts to make the policy
process more coherent within each branch,
while often temporarily successful, have
added new power centers without consolidating
the old ones.

In the executive branch, the trend since
early in the century has been to centralize
power in the White House in order to make
it easier for the president to formulate and
articulate taxing and spending policy, and to
utilize the growing skills of the economics
profession to that end. But this worthy goal
has been accomplished in stages, with a new
institution added at each stage. The creation
of what is now called the Office of Management
of Budget (OMB) in the 1920's made it
possible for the president to review and
evaluate spending requests and impose a set
of priorities on his budget proposal to Congress
reflecting his administration's view of
the appropriate size and role of government.
The creation of the Council of Economic
Advisers (CEA) in the 1940's provided a