fect complicates matters, and I shall soon
return to this difficulty.
We must be mindful also of another
property of the framework here employed.
We are implying, as does the method of the
Residual in general, that it is advisable to
try to translate quality-improvements of
consumer goods into additional quantities
and yet to express productivity-increases
of capital goods and of inputs in general as
quality-improvements for given physical
quantities.
In my appraisal there is no reason to
become disturbed about this lack of symmetry
between the interpretation of improvements
of inputs and that of improvements
of consumer goods. The alternative
would be that of lumping together our
"progress-generating inputs" with the
other inputs, and of interpreting the research
worker not as one who increases the
productivity, and hence the quality of the
inputs with which measured output is
produced, but as one who has the same
kind of productivity in the production of
measured output as do (say) production
workers.28 However, for my present purpose
it would be wrong to cut the story
short in this fashion. I am concerned with
the question how the social yield of progress-
inputs compares with that of other
inputs, and this concern calls for placing
emphasis on the indirectness with which
the progress-inputs produce additional
measured oUtput.29 Thus, for the present
purpose it is useful to have a framework
in which the progress-inputs increase the
" quality" of the other inputs and in which
the other inputs produce quantities of
output.
In practice the effort to let the productivity-
increases of inputs express themselves
in quality-changes for given physical
quantities, and to translate the qualityimprovements
of consumer goods into
quantities, gives rise to many procedural
difficulties and the methods for taking care
of these are admittedly very imperfect. In
particular, it has been argued that the
quantitative allowances for the improvement
of consumer-good quality are not
only very crude (which they certainly are),
but in all probability also insufficient. In a
general way it makes good sense to suspect
that the allowances are quantitatively
insufficient, but we should nevertheless
note that the standard of living of Western
countries is rising rapidly, and it is particularly
true at higher levels of income
that the market basket illustrates instances
of consistent quality-deterioration
as well as of improvement. Nevertheless,
for consumer goods I shall make an allowance
for the assumed underestimate of net
quality improvement (see Appendix C).
Last but not least, an inevitable imperfection
of frameworks of the kind here
employed results from two-way interactions
between physical capital formation
and technological progress. As I said above,
my misgivings about the method by
which vintage models deal with this relationship
does not mean that I consider it
harmless to disregard the interactions.
Starting with initially given resources,
the chances of substantial and continued
improvement are undoubtedly greater if
the processes used are rich in changeable
properties-i.e., in what I elsewhere called
dimensions of improvement-than if these
processes offer improvement possibilities
only in a few directions; and the use of a
large variety of instruments of production
opens up a large number of dimensions of
potential improvement. In another study
I found strong indications that the results
of learning-by-doing are significantly influenced
by differences in the available  28 See Zvi Griliches and Dale Jorgensen.
29 Looking at the matter in this fashion is of course
compatible with using models that represent progress
as the "augmentation" of inputs. Indeed, models of
this sort usually draw a sharp distinction between "inputs
measured in physical units" and "inputs measured
in (augmented) efficiency units."