stabilization policies, as was brought out by the
early interpreters of The General Theory (for
example, John Hicks, the author, 1944), resulted
from the interaction of a basic contribution
to traditional monetary theory-liquidity
preference-and an unorthodox hypothesis
about the working of the labor market-complete
downward rigidity of wages.
Because of liquidity preference, a change in
aggregate demand, which may be broadly defined
as any event that results in a change in the
market clearing or equilibrium rate of interest,
will produce a corresponding change in the real
demand for money or velocity of circulation, and
hence in the real stock of money needed at full
employment. As long as wages are perfectly
flexible, even with a constant nominal supply,
full employment could and would be maintained
by a change of wages and prices as needed to
produce the required change in the real money
supply-though even in this case, stability of the
price level would require a countercyclical monetary
policy. But, under the Keynesian wage
assumption the classical adjustment through
prices can occur only in the case of an increased
demand. In the case of a decline, instead, wage
rigidity prevents the necessary increase in the
real money supply and the concomitant required
fall in interest rates. Hence, if the nominal
money supply is constant, the initial equilibrium
must give way to a new stable one, characterized
by lower output and by an involuntary reduction
in employment, so labeled because it does not
result from a shift in notional demand and supply
schedules in terms of real wages, but only from
an insufficient real money supply. The nature of
this equilibrium is elegantly captured by the
Hicksian IS-LM paradigm, which to our generation
of economists has become almost as familiar
as the demand-supply paradigm was to
earlier ones.
This analysis implied that a fixed money supply
far from insuring approximate stability of
prices and output, as held by the traditional
view, would result in a rather unstable economy,
alternating between periods of protracted unemployment
and stagnation, and bursts of inflation.
The extent of downward instability would depend
in part on the size of the exogenous shocks
to demand and in part on the strength of what
may be called the Hicksian mechanism. By this
I mean the extent to which a shift in IS, through
its interaction with LM, results in some decline
in interest rates and thus in a change in income
which is smaller than the original shift. The stabilizing
power of this mechanism is controlled
by various parameters of the system. In particular,
the economy will be more unstable
the greater the interest elasticity of demand for
money, and the smaller the interest responsiveness
of aggregate demand. Finally, a large
multiplier is also destabilizing in that it implies
a larger shift in IS for a given shock.
However, the instability could be readily
counteracted by appropriate stabilization policies.
Monetary policy could change the nominal
supply of money so as to accommodate the
change in real demand resulting from shocks in
aggregate demand. Fiscal policy, through expenditure
and taxes, could offset these shocks,
making full employment consistent with the
initial nominal money stock. In general, both
monetary and fiscal policies could be used in
combination. But because of a perceived uncertainty
in the response of demand to changes in
interest rates, and because changes in interest
rates through monetary policy could meet difficulties
and substantial delays related to expectations
(so-called liquidity traps), fiscal policy
was regarded as having some advantages.
B. The Early Keynesians
The early disciples of the new Keynesian
gospel, still haunted by memories of the Great
Depression, frequently tended to outdo Keynes'
pessimism about potential instability. Concern
with liquidity traps fostered the view that the demand
for money was highly interest elastic;
failure to distinguish between the short- and
long-run marginal propensity to save led to overestimating
the long-run saving rate, thereby
fostering concern with stagnation, and to underestimating
the short-run propensity, thereby
exaggerating the short-run multiplier. Interest