innovation suggests, it is information
likely to be much more easily available to
one party than to the other. Hence, the
range of possible contingent contracts becomes
limited to those for whom the events
are easily verifiable for both parties. The
implications of these limits are known in
the insurance literature as adverse selection
and moral hazard, and they are of
immediate practical significance in such
matters as health insurance. But more
broadly, they so limit the scope of contingent
markets in practice that, as argued
before in connection with markets for future
goods, they prevent the emergence of
even technically possible markets because
of the large unresolved uncertainties.
I hope enough has been said to indicate
the widespread implications of costly, dispersed
information for the process by
which future-oriented economic decisions
are made. Let me remark, briefly in view
of the length of time I have already taken,
that informational costs and values play a
key role in modifying the structure even of
contemporaneous transactions. The individual
optimizing agent is supposed to
know at least his technology or tastes and
the prices he faces. We have already argued
a good deal of uncertainty with respect
to the future economic implications
of present economic choices. But in addition
there is the possibility that technological
information, which would be useful
to him, exists somewhere in the world but
outside his firm. There are grounds for
engaging in the active pursuit of information.
We begin to enter the realm of diffusion
of innovations, to which some sociologists
as well as economists have contributed.
The interesting points here are
the biasses in the information channels,
some of which, at least, can be explained
in terms of differential costs of acquiring
information. For example, the well-documented
role of personal influence in accepting
innovations can be interpreted as
due to a perceived high reliability of such
information; in economic terms, this means
more information per unit of expenditure
of time or money.
The terms of trade with the outside
world should not be regarded as freely
given to the firm. In a world with a large
number of commodities, even knowing the
prices of relevant commodities involves
the costly acquisition of certain kinds of
information. This remark has given rise
to a large literature on search in recent
years. One implication which has been
only slightly explored is that the concept
of the market begins to weaken, and
Jevons's Law of Indifference becomes
more of an equilibrium condition than a
statement valid about a market even in
disequilibrium. At a moment of time,
prices of what would usually be thought of
as the same commodity bought or sold by
different firms can differ because buyers or
sellers may not, in their ignorance and in
the presence of costs of search, find it
worthwhile to shop further. Obviously, the
important application of this principle
may be to the labor market. Clearly, there
are important informational differences
between the employees currently working
for a firm and potential substitutes elsewhere,
although these are interchangeable
in pure neoclassical theory. Indeed, there
are differences both in the information the
firm possesses about its employees as compared
with alternatives and the information
which employees have about the economic
opportunities and the specific production
conditions of the firm as compared
with outsiders. It appears that considerations
of this type must play some role in
understanding the continued possibility of
unemployment and particularly the sluggish
response of wages to market disequilibria.

I am far from exhausting the implications
of an information-economical viewpoint
for the economic world. I look forward
to exciting developments in the next
decade.