analysis. Though this area encompasses one
of its most crucial accomplishments, there is
no way I can do justice to the details of the
analysis in an oral presentation and within
my allotted span of time. However, an intuitive
view of the matter is not difficult.
The key to the analysis lies in the second
welfare property of contestable equilibriatheir
incompatibility with inefficiency of any
sort. In particular, they are incompatible with
inefficiency in the organization of an industry.
That is, suppose we consider whether
a particular output quantity of an industry
will be produced by two firms or by a thousand.
Suppose it turns out that the two-firm
arrangement can produce the given output at
a cost 20 percent lower than it can be done
by the 1,000 firms. Then one implication of
our analysis is that the industry cannot be in
long-run equilibrium if it encompasses 1,000
producers. Thus we already have some hint
about the equilibrium industry structure of a
contestable market.
We can go further with this example. Suppose
that, with the given output vector for
the industry, it turns out that no number of
firms other than two can produce at as low a
total cost as is possible under a two-firm
arrangement. That is, suppose two firms can
produce the output vector at a total cost
lower than it can be done by one firm or
three firms or sixty or six thousand. Then we
say that for the given output vector the industry
is a natural duopoly.
This now tells us how the industry's structure
can be determined. We proceed, conceptually,
in two steps. First we determine what
structure happens to be most efficient for the
production of a given output vector by a
given industry. Next, we investigate when
market pressures will lead the industry toward
such an efficient structure in equilibrium.

Now, the first step, though it has many
intriguing analytic attributes, is essentially a
pure matter of computation. Given the cost
function for a typical firm, it is ultimately a
matter of calculation to determine how many
firms will produce a given output most efficiently.
For example, if economies of scale
hold throughout the relevant range and there
are sufficient complementarities in the production
of the different commodities supplied
by the firm, then it is an old and
well-known conclusion that single firm production
will be most economical-that we
are dealing with a natural monopoly.
Similarly, in the single product case suppose
the average cost curve is U shaped and
attains its minimum point at an output of
10,000 units per year. Then it is obvious that
if the industry happens to sell 50,000 units
per year, this output can be produced most
cheaply if it is composed of exactly five
firms, each producing 10,000 units at its
point of minimum average cost.
Things become far more complex and more
interesting when the firm and the industry
produce a multiplicity of commodities, as
they always do in reality. But the logic is
always the same. When the industry output
vector is small compared to the output vectors
the firm can produce at relatively low
cost, then the efficient industry structure will
be characterized by very few firms. The opposite
will be true when the industry's output
vector is relatively far from the origin. In the
multiproduct case, since average cost cannot
be defined, two complications beset the characterization
of the output vectors which the
firm can produce relatively efficiently. First,
since here average cost cannot be defined, we
cannot simply look for the point of minimum
average costs. But we overcome this
problem by dealing with output bundles having
fixed proportions among commodity
quantities-by moving along a ray in output
space. Along any such ray the behavior of
average cost is definable, and the point of
minimum ray average cost (RA C) is our
criterion of relatively efficient scale for the
firm. Thus, in Figure 1 we have a ray average
cost curve for the production of boots and
shoes when they are produced in the proportion
given by ray OR. We see that for such
bundles ytm is the point of minimum RA C. A
second problem affecting the determination
of the output vectors the firm can produce
efficiently is the choice of output proportions
-the location of the ray along which the
firm will operate. This depends on the degree
of complementarity in production of the
goods, and it also lends itself to formal analysis.

We note also that the most efficient number
of firms will vary with the location of the