even this is limited by the possibility that
speculative bubbles may burst, and in any
case relatively little recycling is produced
thereby, except to the extent that the enhanced
asset values cause owners to feel
wealthier and spend more.
On the savings side, increased longevity
and the high cost of old-age illness lead to
increased savings through funded pensions
and other provisions for retirement. For this
purpose, the lower the rate of interest, the
greater is the amount of current savings that
must be put aside to provide a given level of
retirement security. More recently the increased
concentration of income among the
very wealthy, who have a high propensity to
save, not so much for eventual consumption
but largely to accumulate chips with which
to play financial games and exercise economic
power, has further added to the savings-
recycling problem. Some recycling may
take place through investment abroad, reflected
in a positive trade balance and the
production of goods for export, though it is
uncertain how far this can be carried in the
face of political instability, the danger of
creating repayment problems, and the resistance
of foreign governments that do not
have an effective full-employment policy of
their own to our exporting our unemployment
to them in this way.

On balance, it may prove impossible, for
the foreseeable future, to maintain a steady
state of genuinely full employment without
a substantial amount of government recycling
of savings, a chronic budget deficit,
and a long-term increasing trend in the national
debt, however distasteful this may be
to those ideologically addicted to a balanced
budget. It may even prove necessary
for the debt to grow at a rate faster than the
growth of GNP. The burden of servicing
this debt might be kept within bounds by
reducing real interest rates, close to zero if
need be, though this might imply a higher
level of private investment than would be
chosen on its own merits. Even contemplating
such prospects calls for a significant
expansion in our range of habitual thought.
XIV. The Task Before Us

This, then, is the challenge I lay before
the economics profession. There is no reason
inherent in the real resources available
to us why we cannot move rapidly within
the next two or three years to a state of
genuinely full employment and then continue
indefinitely at that level. We would
then enjoy a major reduction in the ills of
poverty, homelessness, sickness, and crime
that this would entail. We might also see
less resistance to reductions in military expenditure,
to liberalization of trade and immigration
policy, and to conservation and
environmental protection programs.
I lay before you a plan I believe can
accomplish this. It involves government recycling
of excess savings plus a method of
keeping inflation under control. I believe it
can do the job while preserving the essentials
of a free-market system. There may be
some details to be worked out, but I am
confident that the basic concept is sound
and workable.

We simply cannot carry on as we have
been doing without falling apart as a community
and losing what is left of our status
of world leadership. If you don't think that
something like this can be made to work,
then it is up to us to get together to find
something that will. Otherwise, if we continue
to tie our hands with financial shibboleths
and models that tacitly assume a fixed
total of resource utilization, we are no better
than the feckless castaway whose contribution
to the solution of the problem of
dealing with cases of canned goods was "let's
just assume we have a can-opener."