looking. We introduce as arguments of investment
functions such variables as current
and past output, sales, or utilization of capacity,
current or past profits, cash flow or
measures of liquidity, and current or past
interest rates, depreciation rates, and relative
rental price or user costs of capital. Yet our
theory tells us that the arguments we generally
need are again the expected future values
of these variables. Firms should invest if
they expect the future demand for output to
be high, if they expect the cost of capital to
be higher in the future than now, and if they
look to higher future profits as a consequence
of current investment, but little if at
all in response to current or past values of
these variables.
But these difficulties in finding proxies for
usually unobservable expectations of the future
are only part of the overall problem.
Somehow, econometricians, theorists, and
economic analysts of all stripes have lost
essential communication with the compilers
and synthesizers of their data. As a consequence,
popular discourse, policymaking,
and basic principles of economics have suffered
inordinate confusion. I shall offer this
indictment, in particular, with regard to discussion
of the major macroeconomic variables
with which we are most concerned:
income, output, employment, prices, and
productivity; consumption, saving, investment,
and capital formation; wealth, assets
and liabilities, debt, and deficits. To put
matters bluntly, many of us have literally
not known what we are talking about, or
have confused our listeners-and ourselves
-into thinking that what we are talking
about is directly relevant to the matters with
which we are concerned. In some cases the
confusions do not make all that much difference,
but often they do.'
I. Measures of Income and Product
Take income for starters. We all know
what we mean by income, don't we? Or
do we? The theoretical Hicks-Haig-Simons
(J. R. Hicks, 1940, 1946, 1948; Robert Haig,
1921; Henry Simons, 1938) concept of income
is that which we can consume while
keeping our real wealth intact. But this is a
far cry from the usual measures of individual
incomes, corporate profits or the aggregates
of personal and national income.
First, we allow for capital consumptionthe
depreciation of existing capital-in
measuring income. We may note that capital
consumption allowances with capital consumption
adjustment were 8.22 percent of
GNP in 1951 before the move to permanently
higher tax depreciation allowances
began, were 9.14 percent of GNP by 1960,
11.69 percent by 1983, and 11.98 percent in
1987. Did production really become more
capital-intensive, did the capital mix truly
turn that much less durable,2 or is it possible
that we are overstating capital consumption
and understating national and personal income
and net saving, both in absolute
amounts and as compared to the past?
What about capital gains and losses? If
the value of our stock or bond or house goes
up, can we not consume the gain in addition
to what is usually counted as income, and
still keep our wealth intact? We must indeed
distinguish between the nominal gain and
the real gain, that is, the increase in nominal
value over and above the increase that
would be necessary to compensate for general
inflation. But should not the real gain, in
conformity with the Hicks-Haig-Simons concept,
which I shall denote as "theory," be
included in properly measured income?