to being the best element in this cakedivision
problem.

It is useful to consider what arguments
there might be for considering (50,50) as a
good possibility, and why we cannot use any
of these arguments in the information
framework resulting from Arrow's conditions.
First, it might seem good to divide the
cake equally on some general non-welfarist
ground, without even going into preferences
or utilities. This is not permitted because of
-the exclusion of evaluative use of nonutility
information, and this is what the FieldExpansion
Lemma is formalizing. Second,
presuming that everyone has the same
strictly concave utility function, we might
think that the sum-total of utilities would be
maximized by an equal division of the cake.
But this utilitarian argument involves comparability
of cardinal utilities, which is ruled
out. Third, we might think that equal division
of the cake will equate utilities, and
there are arguments for utility-centered
egalitarianism (see James Meade, 1976). But
that involves interpersonal comparison of
ordinal utilities, which too is ruled out. None
of the standard ways of discriminating between
the alternative states is viable in this
informational framework, and the only way
to choose between them is to go by the
preference of one person or another (since
they have opposite preferences).
To try to make social welfare judgments
without using any interpersonal comparison
of utilities, and without using any nonutility
information, is not a fruitful enterprise. We
do care about the size and distribution of
the overall achievements; we have reasons
to want to reduce deprivation, poverty, and
inequality; and all these call for interpersonal
comparisons-either of utilities or of
other indicators of individual advantages,
such as real incomes, opportunities, primary
goods, or capabilities.21 Once interpersonal
comparisons are introduced, the impossibility
problem, in the appropriately redefined
framework, vanishes.22 The comparisons
may have to be rough and ready and often
open to disputation, but such comparisons
are staple elements of systematic social welfare
judgments. Even without any cardinality,
ordinal interpersonal comparisons permit
the use of such rules of social judgment
as maximin, or lexicographic maximin.23 This
satisfies all of Arrow's conditions (and many
others), though the class of permissible social
welfare rules that do this is quite limited,
unless cardinality is also admitted,
along with interpersonal comparisons (see
Louis Gevers, 1979; Kevin Roberts, 1980a).
With the possibility of using interpersonal
comparisons, other classes of possible rules
for social welfare judgments (including
inter alia, utilitarianism) become usable.24
While the axiomatic derivations of different
social-welfare rules in this literature
are based on applying interpersonal comparisons
to utilities only, the analytical
problems are, in many respects, rather similar
when people are compared in terms of
some other feature, such as real income,
holdings of primary goods, or capabilities to
function. There are, thus, whole varieties of