infections, work-related injuries, and extended
bouts of diarrhea, also increased the odds of
suffering from chronic disabilities by age 60.
Costa concludes that about 15 percent of the
decline in the prevalence of joint problems and
75 percent of the prevalence of back problems
between 1910 and 1980 was due to shifts in
the occupational structure from manual to
white-collar jobs. Moreover, a comparison of
rates of decline in disabilities before and after
1980 indicates that disabilities are declining at
an accelerating rate (cf., Manton et al., 1997a;
Cutler and Elizabeth Richardson, 1998).
The mounting evidence of substantial interactions
over the life cycle that influence the
process of aging, the acceleration of technological
change which has profoundly affected
the context in which aging occurs, and the increasing
evidence that environmental influences
on the aging process begin in utero, has
led to the initiation of a new life-cycle project
called "Fetal, Infant, and Later Aging Markers,
Cohort b. 1910-35." The acronym for
this project is FILAM.

The central objective of FILAM is the creation
of a life-cycle sample of persons born
between 1910 and 1935 that would make it
possible to compare changes in the aging process
over the period of 70 years that separate
this new sample from the aging experiences of
the Union Army cohort. The FILAM cohort is
important not only because it studies individuals
currently between ages 63 and 89, but also
because of the dramatic environmental and
early life-style changes they experienced.
These changes include the rise and partial decline
of smoking, the decline and the new rise
of alcohol consumption, the replacement of
horses by internal combustion engines as the
main source of urban vehicular power, the
cleaning up of the water and milk supplies, and
the emergence of a wide range of effective
medical interventions.

The sample will be drawn from the birth
records of 10,000 men and women of differing
ethnicities and races who were born in Boston,
New York City, Baltimore, Chicago, Iowa
City, and San Francisco. Approximately half
of the neonates will not have survived to the
present day and these men and women will be
linked to their death certificates. The survivors
will be traced and interviewed to determine the
presence of chronic conditions, socioeconomic
status, and family and own health history.
Survivors will be linked to social
security, census, military, and tax records, subject
to their written consent.
FILAM will make it possible to investigate
the predictive power of fetal, neonatal, and
early childhood measures of retarded growth
such as weight for gestational age, ratio of placental
weight to birth weight, infant weight
gain, thinness at birth, arid shortness at birth
relative to head size, on the risk of developing
specific chronic conditions at mid-adult and
late ages. Among the chronic conditions that
will be examined are coronary heart disease,
hypertension, stroke, obstructive lung disease,
non-insulin-dependent diabetes, and autoimmune
thyroiditis. FILAM will also make it
possible to investigate how the interaction of
fetal and infant developments with various risk
factors at later childhood, young adult, and
middle ages may intensify or moderate risks
of chronic conditions and early death after age
65. Another objective is the analysis of differences
in the health histories, occupational histories,
and retirement pattern between FILAM
and the Union Army sanmple, with special emphasis
on the similarities and differences of
predictors of later work levels, morbidity, and
waiting time until death.
The HRS, AHEAD, Union Army sample,
and FILAM all contain information on the
parents and children of the individuals under
study. Hence, they make it possible to address
some factors that may be transmitted
intergenerationally. An effort to utilize archival
data to study intergenerational processes
is also under way. Pope (1992) is
linking a large sample of genealogies to the
life-cycle sample of Union Army recruits.
There are at least 60,000 published family
histories that contain information on over
100,000,000 people who ever lived in North
America. Pope is drawing a subsample of
these histories containing 10,000 men of
military age at the time of the Civil War. It
is estimated that 40 percent of these men
served in the Union Army. This new sample
(called ILAS, for intergenerationally linked
aging sample) will be linked to the military,
pension, medical, and census data sets previously
discussed.
