we may have passed an inflection point in
the price trends of basic inputs to the economy
(see Walt Rostow). The mild downward
trend of the 1951-71 period facilitated
the rise in real incomes of urban workers
side-by-side with rising profits. If this trend
is reversed, rising income claims will generate
greater strains, and the Phillips
curve tradeoff will take place around a
higher inflation constant. Economic analysis
of long-run supply prices of basic
commodities using alternative assumptions
regarding world political, weather,
and economic trends could be a useful aid
to rational economic planning.
Coming back into the domain of economics
as such, one should take account of
the important new thinking and efforts
now being devoted to the continuing
mysteries of industrial pricing policies and
the role of fixed-rule (generally, mark-up)
pricing as a shield against uncertainty.
Answering the question of how, and how
fast, supply-shifts in the auction markets
or market-oriented sector are transmitted
through the rule-determined sectorwhere
certain relativities seem to be maintained
in the structure of prices (and
wages)-is essential to an understanding
of structural inflation (see Piore).
In turn, this analysis will strongly influence
thinking on government intervention
in private wage-price and perhaps
also supply-demand decisions. If the wageprice
structure is indeed fairly rigid and if
supply- and demand-shifts set off an inflationary
spiral, the "natural market
forces" will not readily make the necessary
supply-demand adjustment in any case.
Wage-price restraint or controls would not
be supplanting some supple and efficient
resource allocation mechanism, yet would
insert a circuit breaker into the inflationary
spiral. This view of the world would
also suggest that government action to
stimulate supply and suppress demand at
certain pressure points in the economy
might well pass the test of economic efficiency.
In pursuing these questions and
hypotheses, the economist will be laying a
firmer conceptual and empirical foundation
for specifying the areas and circumstances
in which intervention may be the
lesser evil.
One should not leave the subject of
economists' contributions to analysis and
prescription on the inflation problem
without mention of the intriguing attempt
of the Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity to bring the best analytical and
empirical efforts of economists to bear directly
on the problems and puzzles that
confront the policymaker. In relation to
inflation, the Panel has focussed much of
its attention on such questions as the
structure of labor markets, the Phillips
curve relationship and wage equations,
the costs of unemployment, price behavior
in specific sectors like foodstuffs and oil,
and the role of fiscal and monetary
policies. Apart from the significant contributions
that have been made to understanding
these problems, and to bringing
academic work into closer contact with
current policy problems, the Brookings
Panel is an interesting and perhaps unique
exercise in "continuing confrontational
econometrics." Responding to the kinds of
criticisms quoted earlier in my remarks,
the Brookings Panel combines rigorous
quantitative testing with continuing surveillance
by one's peers to assure that the
investigator (a) looks beyond mathematics
and makes his assumptions and- relations
conform to common sense, (b) spells
out the implications of his econometrics
and, if they are implausible, tries again,
and (c) constantly keeps asking questions
of the model. With the Panel now going
into its sixth year of thrice-yearly meetings,
previous analyses become not undisturbed
museum pieces, but grist for the
mill of constant retesting under the harsh
light of reality and peer-group criticism.