Later on in the book, Pigou makes an observation
that is not explicitly connected
with collective bargaining. He does connect
it with "actual life" however, and it fits
organized workers very well, and perhaps
others besides:
In periods of expansion employers
might be willing to agree to substantial
advances in wage rates if they
were confident that, when prosperity
ended, they would be able to cancel
them. They know, however, that in
fact this will not be easy, that elaborate
processes will have to be gone
through, and that their work-people
will put up a strong rear-guard action.
.. . In periods of depression
wage-earners, for precisely similar reasons,
hold out against wage reductions,
which they might be ready to
concede if it were not for the difficulty
that they foresee in getting them
cancelled when times improve.... A
widespread desire for 'safety first'
helps to make wage rates sticky.
[1945, p. 48]
These casual remarks raise more questions
than they answer about the determination
of nominal wages by collective bargaining.
The first excerpt can be taken as a redefinition
of full employment when the labor
market is not competitive; the second, however,
advances an account of wage stickiness
and is therefore on a different footing.
It would help to explain the failure of the
labor market to clear on any reasonable
definition, and thus provide a connection
between nominal demand and real output.
The third institutional factor mentioned
by Pigou has also been the subject of much
analysis, past and present: the provision of
unemployment insurance. There are several
channels by which the availability of unemployment
compensation can add to the recorded
amount of unemployment. The
prolongation of search is only the most
obvious. My own impression is that this is
currently a significant factor. As an indication
of the complexity of the issues, let me
just mention here that some recent research
by my colleagues Peter Diamond and Eric
Maskin suggests the possibility that in some
environments search activity conveys a positive
externality. So the optimal search
strategy for the individual might provide
less than the socially optimal amount of
search, and unemployment compensation
could be regarded as a corrective subsidy.
This is a neat twist on the theme of the
counterpoint between market efficiency and
market failure. In any case, it can hardly be
doubted that the unemployment compensation
system is an important determinant of
behavior on both sides of the labor market,
and complicates even the definition of full
employment.
The last comment of Pigou's that I want
to cite is especially intriguing because it is so
unlike the sort of thing that his present day
successors keep saying. Already in the 1933
Theory of Unemployment he wrote: "... . public
opinion in a modem civilized State
builds up for itself a rough estimate of what
constitutes a reasonable living wage. This is
derived half-consciously from a knowledge
of the actual standards enjoyed by more
or less 'average' workers.... Public opinion
then enforces its view, failing success
through social pressure, by the machinery
of... legislation" (p. 255). A similar remark
appears in Lapses. Such feelings about equity
and fairness are obviously relevant to
the setting of statutory minimum wages, and
Pigou uses them that way. I think they also
come into play as a deterrent to wage cutting
in a slack labor market. Unemployed
workers rarely try to displace their employed
counterparts by offering to work for
less; and it is even more surprising, as I
have had occasion to point out in the past,
that employers so rarely try to elicit wage
cutting on the part of their laid-off employees,
even in a buyer's market for labor.
Several forces can be at work, but I think
Occam's razor and common observation
both suggest that a code of good behavior
enforced by social pressure is one of them.
Wouldn't you be surprised if you learned
that someone of roughly your status in the
profession, but teaching in a less desirable
department, had written to your department
chairman offering to teach your courses for
less money? The fact that nominal wage
rates did fall sharply during the early stages
of the depression of the 1930's, and the fact
that the Chrysler Corporation has been able