or if a problem has not yet become a crisis,
the economist's call for action is likely to
go unheeded. On the other, spotting
emergent problems early can perhaps
hasten an idea's time and alert the policy
makers to impending danger.
Economists can more readily be faulted
for being caught by surprise by the shortages
of materials and primary processing
capacity that caused the economy to
bump against its ceiling sooner than expected
and by the worldwide economic
boom that put severe pressure on raw
commodity supplies and prices. On the
first point, we suffered both from information
failure-the official capacity indexes
simply did not reveal how close the economy
was to its output ceilings-and from
analytic limits. While identifying the
causes, economists have been unable to
pinpoint the relative significance of the
shortfall of investment that began in the
late 1960's, of underinvestment caused by
price controls, of delays induced by environmental
policies, and of the surge in
foreign demand touched off by devaluation.
However, I should add that the
shortages problem is meat and drink for
economists, and they are responding (especially
in the energy field) with new
analyses of price elasticities, investment
needs, and the like. All of a sudden, price
theory is back in vogue, and elasticities
have replaced multipliers as the badge of a
policy maker's savoir faire.
Delays in perceiving that the U.S. economic
expansion was part of a worldwide
upsurge can again be laid more to lack of
an adequate information system than to
any inability to understand the underlying
principles. Still, a better sense of history
and of the emerging worldwide imbalance
between growing aspirations and
growing incomes on one hand and inelastic
resource supply and lagging technology
on the other would have made us more
conscious and cautious. We are considerably
less likely to be caught by surprise in
the future in view of the new worldwide
data networks that are being developed by
Project LINK at the University of Pennsylvania
and by Otto Eckstein and his
colleagues at Data Resources Incorporated
(DRJ).

Without absolving economists, one
should apply this operational test: With
proper foresight, would tighter monetary
and budget policy have been able to
damp inflation? It is worth recalling, first,
that the full employment budget was
making a swing of over $10 billion towards
restraint between fiscal 1973 and fiscal
1974 (from a $2 billion deficit to a $10
billion surplus under the old 4 percent unemployment
standard) and that monetary
policy pushed interest rates into the
double-digit region; second, that there was
little that an aggregate demand squeeze
could have done to push world commodity
prices down. So the answer is clear: Even
tougher fiscal and monetary policy would
have had limited scope in holding inflation
down.

This is not to deny that generating a
larger full employment surplus would
have been the prudent course in calendar
1973. But it is worth noting that to offset
the food and fuel price explosions-which
were triggered by forces largely immune to
U.S. fiscal and monetary policy-would
have required a reduction of 3 percent in
all other prices. Such a target implies depression-
inducing doses of fiscal and monetary
restriction, an unthinkable "solution.
"

Looking toward the future, many economists
draw the lesson not that one should
keep the economy's motor idling,' but
rather that one should provide it with
safety devices and heavy-duty shock absorbers,
for example, stock-piling of foodstuffs,
oil, and basic raw materials, careful
tracking of commodity exports, distant
early warning systems to spot shortagesin-the-making,