the part of employers and workers. Macroeconomic
shocks will gradually overcome the
relative wage stickiness and move the aggregate
nominal wage level in the desired direction,
but the transitional costs are large.
I. Some Relevant Features of the Implicit
Contract Literature
By now the literature on implicit contracts
is so large and so diverse that I cannot do it
justice in a brief summary. But it is necessary
to sketch out a few elements of that research,
paying particular attention to several key
features that bear on the relationship between
wage behavior and aggregate demand
shocks.
The flexible-price, market-clearing model,
in which economic agents are price takers
and prompt quantity adjusters, would be a
useful paradigm in a very particular kind of
world. In this world labor and product
markets would be characterized by a great
deal of homogeneity, and so individual transactions
would be carried on in very "thick"
markets. There would be no reason for preserving
a continuity of relationships between
workers and firms, customers and suppliers,
lenders and borrowers. Workers would be
interchangeable; the marginal revenue product
of a particular class of workers would be
the same regardless of the firm to which the
worker was attached. Either labor effort could
be easily monitored or it would be completely
proportional to labor hours paid for.
And, wherever commitments had to be made
for the future, expectations about the important
variables entering into the decision
could be drawn from fixed stochastic distributions,
knowledge of which, in turn, could
be derived from the recurrent nature of past
events. As well as being unbiased, forecasts
could significantly improve on coin-flips.
The world that we are trying to model,
however, is in fact different in several fundamental
ways. Most importantly, in a
substantial part of the economy there are
large returns to maintaining the continuity of
association between workers and firms.
Workers acquire nontransferable, firmspecific
skills; and some of the cost of the
acquisition may be paid by the firm. They
acquire knowledge about the nonwage attributes
of a job through experience on thal
job. Continuity of association also provides
firms with hard-to-come-by knowledge about
the reliability and productivity of specific
workers. Additional transition, search, and
moving costs are incurred by workers and
firms when the association is broken. Substantial
bilateral monopoly rents to continuity
are thus generated among firms and their
experienced work force.
Risk aversion introduces another reason
for continuity of association. For at least
some range of possible variations in the economic
environment facing a firm, it is likely
to be less risk averse than its workers. But
the relevant insurance contracts cannot be
traded separately from employment contracts,
and so continuity of association becomes
a joint product with insurance. Finally,
in the real world, labor time is not
synonymous with performance. Monitoring
worker performance or effort is costly, but
the payment of higher than the "going wage"
will bind workers to the firms with an incentive
to avoid shirking. And the particular
workers who "survive" the monitoring are
those who have found the premium sufficient
to avoid monitorable shirking, a piece of
valuable information to the firm flowing from
continuity of association.
Realizing the benefits from long-term
worker-firm relationships requires, of course,
some sort of explicit or implicit agreement
between employers and workers on the terms
of the relationship, especially with respect to
wages and employment opportunities. Several
problems in modeling these long-term worker-
firm agreements have dominated the recent
literature. First, when the marginal revenue
product of labor changes, how are wages
and employment to be adjusted while still
preserving contractual relationships? Second,
since firms are much better able than workers
to observe the marginal product of labor and
since contingent contracts directly tied to the
various states of nature cannot practically be
designed, how can contract terms allow for
some flexibility in meeting changing conditions
without giving employers incentives
to provide false information about labor's
marginal product? This is the problem of