respond to periodic surveys. Members are com-
pensated for participation on the panel. For our
study, 5,879 members of the panel aged 50
and over were contacted. Of these, 4,738 indi-
viduals completed the survey. Our present anal-
ysis is restricted to those respondents who are in
the Medicare-eligible population, for the pur-
poses of our study defined as age 65 and older
(N = 1996).
The survey lasted about 22 minutes and cov-
ered, in addition to questions about Part D,
questions about health status and conditions,
long-term care choices, prescription drug use
and cost, and attitudes toward risk. We also use
the 2001 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey
(MCBS) distribution of annual pharmacy bills,
and an AARP survey giving median prices of
commonly prescribed drugs (as of April 2005)
for nine health conditions. Table 5 gives the
average numbers of prescriptions used by vari-
ous groups. Notable is the increase in the num-
ber of prescriptions for those who have their
pharmacy bills paid by others, relative to those
who pay their own bills.
We find that despite the complexity of the
Part D program's competing plans, a majority
of the Medicare population has at least some
knowledge and intends to enroll. However, low-
income, less educated elderly with poor health
or some cognitive impairment are significantly
less informed and may fail to take advantage of
the program. Table 6 gives the fractions of the
Medicare population who just before enroll-
ment started said they had little or no knowl-

edge of Part D. Table 7 gives the percentages of
the Medicare population who said just before
enrollment started they were unlikely to enroll
in a Part D plan. This does not include people
who will not enroll directly in Part D because
they already have prescription drug coverage
that is at least as good as the Medicare standard
plan. Overall, 17 percent say they are unlikely
to enroll. The percentages are higher for those
in good health, and those poorly informed. The
percentage differences are small, but statisti-
cally significant.
A revealing assessment of the consistency of
individual intentions is obtained by comparing
enrollment choices with the alternatives that
minimize the expected present value (EPV) of
out-of-pocket cost (OPC). Underlying the en-
rollment decision is an option value problem: If
an eligible person enrolls immediately in Part
D, her EPV of OPC in each year from 2006 to
the end of her life will be the $444 annual
premium plus her expected pharmacy bill, less
the Part D benefit. If, on the other hand, she
delays one year, then the EPV of her OPC is her
expected pharmacy bill for 2006 plus the EPV
of her OPC from 2007 forward, assuming that
she makes the decision to enroll or delay in
2007 and subsequent years to minimize EPV of
OPC, and assuming that these future decisions
take into account the new information she will
obtain on health and prescription costs as she
goes along, and the Medicare premium penalty
for late enrollment, which is 7 percent in 2007,
and 12 percent per year thereafter. With infor-
mation on the probabilities of developing new
health conditions, and the distributions of drug
costs for required therapies, this can be formu-
lated as a dynamic stochastic programming
problem, and solved by backward recursion to
determine a threshold depending on age, such
that if the current pharmacy bill is below the
threshold, an individual who seeks to minimize