production orientations will be empire-builders.
In contrast, the role of the conscientious CFO is
to curb those enthusiasms. Fifty years have
elapsed since the publication of ModiglianiMiller.
According to Zorn, when it first appeared,
it did not describe the investment
decision of large corporations. Now, quite possibly,
changes in corporate decision-making  since that time make it more realistic.65
C. Summary
The investment decision demonstrates once
again that the respective neutrality result depends
on the objective function of the decision makers.
VII. Natural Rate Theory
We now turn to natural rate theory. Once
again, the debate concerns the behavior of economic
decision makers. The early Keynesians
viewed wage setters, and possibly also price
setters, as setting nominal wages and prices,
respectively, without taking full account of inflationary
expectations. In contrast, New Classical
revisionists have assumed that wage and
price setters care only about relative wages or
prices, and therefore wage and price setting will
fully incorporate inflationary expectations. Such
behavior yields a long-run neutrality result with
severe limits on the ability of monetary and
fiscal policy to affect unemployment and output.
When wage and price setters care only
about relative wages and relative prices, accelerating
inflation will occur if unemployment is
below a critical level, called the natural rate;
accelerating deflation will occur if unemployment
is above it.
As we shall see, such spirals occur because,
at high levels of demand, the representative firm
will wish to set the price of its product relative
to the price of other firms' products-which we  call its real price-in excess of unity. A standard
natural rate model illustrates why this occurs. That
model assumes that in each period the typical firm
sets a desired real price for the following period;
in each period it also makes a bargain with its
labor regarding next period's real wages. Next
period's nominal price and nominal wage are then
respectively set by adjusting this desired real price
and this bargained real wage according to inflationary
expectations. When demand is higher, the
desired real price of the representative firm is
higher for two reasons: on the demand side, because
the demand for its product is higher, and, on
the cost side, because the bargained real wage is
higher. That bargained real wage is higher both
because the typical employee's opportunity costs,
which take into account her chances of being
unemployed, are higher, and because the firm's
desire for her labor is higher. Since the firm's
owners, customers, and workers care only about
real prices or real wages, a given level of real
aggregate demand will be associated with a given
real wage bargain between the firm and its workers,
and a given desired real price for the firm's
product. If unemployment is sufficiently lowbelow
the natural rate-that desired real price will
be in excess of unity. If unemployment is above
the natural rate, it will be less than unity.
It is now easy to explain the inflationary and
deflationary spirals in natural rate theory. Consider
what happens when the representative firm
wishes to set its price above that of other firms.
In this case, actual inflation will exceed expected
inflation. With such a positive gap between
actual and expected inflation, inflationary
expectations will rise, as inflationary expectations
are adjusted upward to conform to reality.
But the firm's desired real price, and therefore
the difference between actual and expected inflation,
will be unchanged as long as unemployment
is constant. There will be no abatement in
the rise in expected inflation. Inflationary expectations
will be forever increasing, and inflation
will rise with it, as nominal prices and
wages adjust the real wage bargains and the
desired real prices for these increasing inflationary
expectations. By similar logic, if unemployment
is above the natural rate, there will be a
deflationary spiral. The natural rate is the only
sustainable level of unemployment without accelerating
or decelerating inflation. It corresponds
to the exact level of demand where firms
wish to set a real price of exactly one.