Unemployment insurance also does not redistribute
to the poor. In Massachusetts, a state considered
to have a very generous UI program, the
UI benefits were financed in 2003 by a payroll tax
on only the first $10,800 of earnings (with a zero
marginal tax rate above that level), while basic
benefits were 50 percent of previous wages up to
more than $50,000 of wages per year.
An individual who earns $50,000 a year pays
the same tax as someone who earns $11,000 a
year but would receive benefits that are nearly
five times as high.3 Taken by itself this would
mean a substantial redistribution from lowwage
earners to higher-wage earners. Moreover,
since benefits are paid only to individuals who
have earned some minimum amount during the
past year, those with long spells of unemployment
may not be eligible for any benefits at all.
Although the same Medicare rules apply to
everyone over age 65, higher-income seniors
often get substantially more benefits than those
with lower incomes. Mark McClellan and
Jonathan Skinner (1997) concluded that Medicare
produced net transfers from the poor to the
wealthy as a result of the higher annual expenditures
and longer survival times of wealthier
Medicare beneficiaries. In the same spirit, Skinner
and Weiping Zhou (2004) found greater use
of mammography screening, diabetic eye exams,
and other indicators of good care among
high-income Medicare groups than among
those with lower incomes.
The very high level of spending on the middle
class social insurance programs hurts the
low-income population in another way: by putting
a drain on the government budget in a way
that reduces the funds available for helping the
poor. Social insurance programs cost $800 billion
in 2003, while federal spending on all
means-tested programs, except Medicaid, was
less than $150 billion.4 Over the past four decades,
the spending on means-tested programs
(except Medicaid) has remained relatively constant
(rising from 1.0 percent of GDP to 1.3
percent of GDP) while the social insurance pro-
grams that are not means tested rose from 2.7
percent of GDP to 7.4 percent of GDP.
The negative effect of social insurance spending
on means-tested programs is not only an
observed fact but is also what optimal tax theory
implies. The deadweight burden of an extra
dollar of taxes increases with the share of income
taken in taxes. The high level of taxes that is
needed to finance middle-class social insurance
programs therefore increases the deadweight burden
of any incremental taxes that would be used to
finance means-tested poverty programs. The large
social insurance programs thus reduce the optimal
size of means-tested poverty programs.
II. Why Social Insurance?
Some writers see social insurance in broad
philosophical terms, reflecting their specific
views of the appropriate role of government in
society. One such view, more common in Europe
than in the United States, is that social
insurance should be judged by its contribution
to social solidarity, i.e., to the sense that all of
the individuals in the nation are, in effect,
viewed as a single family and treated equally.
This leads to the principle of uniform health care
for all, although this is more often an asserted
political goal than a practical reality. Similarly,
they may reject any role for company-based
private pensions in order that all workers participate
in a common pay-as-you-go state plan.
The opposite philosophical view is that the
provision of health care or retirement income is
not a legitimate role for government because it
forces individuals to participate in a common
program rather than taking personal responsibility
and making decisions that reflect their
own preferences. Milton Friedman's Capitalism
and Freedom (1962) is the classic statement of
this view that social insurance programs are
inappropriate because they infringe upon individual
liberty.
The social solidarity view is often combined
with the statement that individuals are incapable
of making the complex decisions required to
plan for retirement income or to choose health
insurance or health care. The opposite view
emphasizes that individuals differ in their tastes
and are better able than governments to judge
what is in their own best interest.
I believe in the diversity of individual preferences
and the ability of most individuals to act