ways in which social welfare judgments can
be made using richer information than in
the Arrow framework.

This applies also to procedures specifically
aimed at making social welfare judgments
and other aggregative evaluations,
based on institutionally accepted ways of
making interpersonal comparisons: for example,
in using indexes of income inequality
(see Serge Kolm's [1969] and Anthony
Atkinson's [1970] pioneering work on this),
or in aggregate measures of distributioncorrected
real national income (Sen, 1976a),
or of aggregate poverty (Sen, 1976b).5 This
links the theory of social choice to some of
the most intensely practical debates on economic
policy.26 While Arrow's impossibility
theorem is a negative result, the challenge it
provided has led, dialectically, to a great
many constructive developments.
V. On Social Decision Mechanisms
Moving from the exercise of making social
judgments to that of choosing social
decision mechanisms, there are other difficulties
to be faced. While systematic interpersonal
comparisons of utilities (and other
ways of seeing individual advantage) can be
used by a person making social welfare
judgment, or in agreed procedures for social
judgments (based on interpreting available
statistics to arrive at, say, orderings of aggregate
poverty or inequality or distribution-
corrected real national income), this is
not an easy thing to do in social-decision
mechanisms which must rely on some standard
expressions of individual preference
(such as voting), which do not readily lend
themselves to interpersonal comparisons.
The impossibility problem, thus, has
greater resilience here. While it is also the
case that the critique of James Buchanan
(and others) of the idea of "social rationality"
and the concept of "social preference"
applies particularly in this case (that of
judging social decision mechanisms), the impossibility
problem does indeed survive, as
we have seen, even when the concept of
social preference is eschewed and the idea
of social rationality in the Arrovian form is
dropped altogether (Section III). How, then,
can we respond to the challenge in this
case?

We may begin by noting that the conditions
formulated and used by Arrow, while
appealing enough, are not beyond criticism.
First, not every conceivable combination of
individual preferences need be considered
in devising a social decision procedure, since
only some would come up in practice. As
Arrow had himself noted, if the condition of
unrestricted domain is relaxed, we can find
decision rules that satisfy all the other conditions
(and many other demands) over substantial
domains of individual preference
profiles. Arrow (1951), along with Duncan
Black, had particularly explored the case of
"single-peaked preferences," but it can be
shown (Sen, 1966) that this condition can be
far extended and generalized to a much less
demanding restriction called "value restriction.
"27
