THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
rate each year to produce enough revenues to
cover expenditures for given values of
points.71 Both types of adjustment need a
small buffer stock of assets (or borrowing
ability) because of lags between setting benefit
or tax rules and the determination of actual
expenditures and revenues.72
U.S. Social Security uses price and wage
indexing in the determination of both benefits
and the payroll tax base.73 This reliance on
automatic adjustments decreases the frequency
of the need for legislation.74 One popular proposal
is to extend automatic adjustments to include
an adjustment for life expectancy. Such a
change would play two roles-one is to have an
automatic adjustment rather than legislating in
anticipation of or in response to life expectancy
changes. The other is to decrease the actuarial
imbalance in a way that may be easier politically
than comparable direct changes.
But what mix of benefit and revenue changes
is the best response to increased life expectancy?75
71 To some, this is the heart of a defined benefit system,
including possibly placing the risk outside the labor market,
as can be done if the risk is shifted to corporations or
general revenues.
72 One difference is that if we attempt to increase tax
revenues (as opposed to lowering benefit payments), we
face the risk of exceeding the maximum that could be
collected (i.e., moving to the wrong side of the Laffer
curve). Presumably, with a sensible execution of this ap-
proach, this risk would be so low as not to be a problem.
Adjustment possibilities are more complex than just some
combination of tax increases and benefit decreases (or the
converses). In the presence of a projected deficit, benefit
reduction can be large enough to lower tax rates and tax
increases can be large enough to raise benefits. Recognizing
more complexity, some tax rates could go up while others
go down and benefits for some groups could go up while
benefits for other groups go down. Indeed, several proposed
reform plans include increased benefits for some vulnerable
groups along with general benefit cuts.
73 The current indexing is not complete-there is no
adjustment of benefits for inflation between the years a
worker is 60 and 62. This gap should be closed.
74 Indeed, the 1972 automatic indexation for inflation
(which was done incorrectly) was an attempt to codify how
Congress had been behaving, thereby reducing the fre-
quency of the need to legislate. The automatic indexing was
done incorrectly because congressional actions had been
unsatisfactory in structure, without this being as apparent as
when the changes became automatic and inflation increased.
75 We could also consider an automatic adjustment of the
earliest eligibility age and of the actuarial adjustments for
the age at which benefits start. The latter, but not the
former, is included in Sweden. Indexing the earliest
eligibility age is complex since the sizes of the groups
Part of an approach to this question is to ask
how individual lifetime plans should vary with
life expectancy. This depends on how the potential
earnings trajectory and the difficulty
(disutility) of work change along with life expectancy.
If both opportunities and difficulties
in a year depended on the proportional position
of that year relative to life expectancy (and
mortality rates also depended on relative age),
then all of an optimal individual adjustment
would come in working longer. That is, optimal
work would be a fixed fraction of life expectancy.
The change in Social Security with the
same pattern has all of the adjustment in lower
benefits for each age of retirement.
However, I suspect that the proportional case
assumes too large a change in both earnings
opportunities and difficulty in work relative to
life expectancy. If the optimal outcome for an
individual were to work a smaller percentage of
life expectancy, then a sensible approach would
spread the implied drop in lifetime consumption
over both pre- and postretirement years. Decreased
preretirement consumption corresponds
to an increase in the Social Security tax rate. In
historic data, where the steady growth in life
expectancy has been accompanied by a steady
growth in real earnings, we have a steady decline
in the percentage of life expectancy
worked. This suggests a mix of tax and benefit
changes since we do expect a continued correlation
between life expectancies and earnings
levels.76 I also believe that, at least among academic
economists, the life cycle of productivity
relates to more than just health and it is
unclear how such other factors are correlated
with life expectancy. I think an automatic adjustment
for life expectancy that included adjustment
in both benefits and tax rates would be
a good idea.
Should we have more automatic adjustments
helped and hurt by an increase are not likely to be simply
related to life expectancy.
76 Automatic adjustment of benefits for life expectancy
is naturally done on a cohort basis, while any adjustment in
taxes is naturally done on a yearly basis. Thus more rapid
increases in life expectancy would fall differently on differ-
ent cohorts when taxes are included in the adjustment than
when they are not. My plan with Orszag (2004) takes the
approach of a mix of automatic tax and benefit changes for
life expectancy, while Model 3 of the Commission to
Strengthen Social Security does all its automatic adjustment
for life expectancy on the side of benefits.
20
MARCH 2004