industry's output vector. The industry may
be a natural monopoly with one output vec-
tor, a natural duopoly with another, and
efficiency may require seventy-three firms
when some third output vector is provided
by the industry.
This, then, completes the first of the two
basic steps in the endogenous determination
of industry structure. Here we have ex-
amined what industry structure is least costly
for each given output vector of a given in-
dustry, and have found how the result de-
pends on the magnitudes of the elements of
that output vector and the shape of the cost
function of the typical firm. So far the dis-
cussion may perhaps be considered norma-
tive rather than behavioral. It tells us what
structure is most efficient under the circum-
stances, not which industry structure will
emerge under the pressures of the market
mechanism.
The transition toward the second, behav-
ioral, stage of the analysis is provided by the
observation that the optimal structure of an
industry depends on its output vector, while
that output vector in turn depends on the
prices charged by its firms. But, since pricing
depends on industry structure, we are
brought full circle to the conclusion that
pricing behavior and industry structure must,
ultimately, be determined simultaneously and
endogenously.
We are in no position to go much further
than this for a market whose properties are
unspecified. But, for a perfectly contestable
market, we can go much further. Indeed, the
properties of perfect contestability cut
through every difficulty and tell us the equi-
librium prices, outputs, and industry struc-
ture, all at once.
Where more than one firm supplies a
product, we have already characterized these
prices precisely. For we have concluded that
each equilibrium price will equal the associ-
ated marginal cost. Then, given the industry's
cost and demand relationships, this yields
the industry's output quantities simulta-
neously with its prices, in the usual manner.
Here there is absolutely nothing new in the
analysis.
But what is new is the format of the
analysis of the determination of industry
structure. As I have already pointed out,
structure is determined by the efficiency re-
quirement of equilibrium in any contestable
market. Since no such equilibrium is compat-
ible with failure to minimize industry costs,
it follows that the market forces under per-
fect contestability will bring us results con-
sistent with those of our normative analysis.
Whatever industry structures minimize total
costs for the equilibrium output vector must
turn out to be the only structures consistent
with industry equilibrium in the long run.
Thus, for contestable markets, but for con-
testable markets only, the second stage of the
analysis of industry structure turns out to be
a sham. Whatever industry structure was
shown by the first, normative, portion of the
analysis to be least costly must also emerge
as the industry structure selected by market
behavior. No additional calculations are re-
quired by the behavioral analysis. It will all
have been done in the normative cost-
minimization analysis and the behavioral
analysis is pure bonus.
Thus, as I promised, I have indicated how
contestability theory departs from the older
theory which implicitly took industry struc-
ture to be determined exogenously in a
manner totally unspecified and, instead,
along with other recent writings, embraces
the determination of industry structure as an
integral part of the theory to be dealt with
simultaneously with the determination of
prices and outputs.
At this point I can only conjecture about
the determination of industry structure once
we leave the limiting case of perfect contest-
ability. But my guess is that there are no