resources that traces back to the conditions of
their youth. Persons aged 80 today were borm
in 1918 or 1919. Only 43 percent of that cohort
graduated from high school and less than 15
percent entered college. Even among the
youngest cohort of the elderly, those born in
1933 and 1934, only half graduated from high
school and about 20 percent entered college
(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975 p. 379).
These cohorts also suffered from high infant
death rates, poor nutrition in early infancy, and
early onset of chronic diseases, as compared
with cohorts born since World War II.
Hence, despite their relatively high levels of
income and stocks of consumer durables, the
maldistribution of spiritual resources is substantial.
Depression, alienation, and substance
abuse are common (S. C. Samuels, 1997).
Those who are most afflicted are lonely, have
few communal contacts, live in retirement
homes rather than in their own households,
and sense a loss of control over their personal
lives (W. L. Fletcher and R. 0. Hansson,
1991; K. Pahkala et al. 1992; K. Yamashita
et al., 1993). Recent studies also indicate that
those who lacked immaterial resources early
in life have difficulty in attaining selfrealization
after retirement (J. C. HIenretta,
1997; J. E. Mutchler et al., 1997).
I have emphasized the level of education because
recent studies indicate that the capacity
of the elderly to engage effectively in physical
activity was strongly correlated with education
early in life. Education also affects cognitive
ability and the rate of illness (J. W. Rowe and
R. L. Kahn, 1997). Consequently, individuals
who were deprived of adequate education in
youth are, for that reason among others, relatively
deprived of both physiological and spiritual
resources in late life.
Despite the long reach of youthful deprivation,
there are enough other factors affecting
the quality of elderly life to pennit redistributions
that compensate for previous deficits.
On the physiological side, for example, there
are effective medical interventions that can increase
the quality of life and longevity. Although
the elderly are eligible for Medicare to
pay for treatment, the quality of treatment is
variable, and many individuals may be
shunted to low-quality care. Moreover, some
interventions are denied, or are more reluc-  tantly ordered, for the elderly than for the middle
aged.
Because spiritual resources are so unequally
distributed among the elderly, different
programs are needed for different
strata. The mninority of the current elderly
who are well educated, the 14 percent with
at least bachelor's degrees, most of whom
had professional careers, have developed
some innovative programs (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1997 p. 160). In Great Britain
one of these is called the "University of the
Third Age." This educational program is not
aimed at providing credentials for those
about to embark upon new careers, but at
satisfying the thirst for knowledge. It is
based on the proposition that education, and
the acquired knowledge and skills, are a
source of self-satisfaction, even if they do
not enhance an individual's employability.
As Laslett (1991 pp. 171-71) put it:
Reading in a literature, mastering a language,
unraveling a point in logic or philosophy,
understanding the objectives
set for themselves by poets, painters,
novelists or architects, these things extend
your appreciation and your miastery
of your world, your objective and your
subjective world as well. They are fulfilling,
and adding to other people's
knowledge is the most fulfilling of all.
Programs su'h as the University of the
Third Age will become increasingly important
as the baby boomers and others of the more
highly educated cohorts of the post-World
War :I era begin to retire. However, today and
for the next decade, the bulk of the elderly
lacks the skills to create and participate in such
high-level programs as the University of the
Third Age. A recent survey of adult literacy
revealed that more than half of the elderly population
suffers from functional illiteracy.
These individuals may be able to sign their
name or read very simple material, but they
cannot follow instructions for taking medicines
or cope with a variety of documents encountered
in daily living (R. Boling, 1,998).
Those who suffer from low levels of literacy
are educable. Engaging them in intellectual activities
has a significant influence on their
physiological perormance. Recent studies reveal