economic policy, capped by the tax cut,
was the major force holding the postwar
economy on a vastly higher plane than
the prewar economy.5 On one hand, the
high employment, limited-recession economy
forged with our macro-economic
policy tools is indeed an inflation-prone
economy the formula for successful management
of high-pressure prosperity is far
more elusive than the formula for getting
there. Yet on the other hand, success bred
great expectations on the part of the public
that economics could deliver prosperity
without inflation and with ever-growing
material gains in the bargain. The message
got through that we had "harnessed the
existing economics . . . to the purposes of
prosperity, stability, and growth," and
that as to the role of the tax cut in breaking
old molds of thinking, "nothing succeeds
like success" (Heller). The Economist
unkindly corrected me: "Nothing exceeds
like success."6
To be sure, critics and converts alike
ignored our caveats that the goal of
"prosperity without a price-wage spiral"
had "eluded not only this country but all
of its industrial partners in the free world,"
that "the margin for error diminishes as
the economy reaches the treasured but
treacherous area of full employment. . .
and that "the 'new economics' promises
no money-back guarantees against occasional
slowdowns or even recessions"
(Heller).
All too soon, Vietnam blew the economy
off-course. Economists found that in the
political arena fiscal policy was not a twoway
street and that the much delayed surtax
adopted in mid-1968 was no match for
surging inflation. Nor was the induced recession
of 1969-70. It took a combination
of the 1971 shock therapy of tight wageprice
controls and the stimulus of tax cuts
to subdue inflation and energize expansion.
It is worth noting that economists analyzed
and projected the effects of this
''new economic policy" with exceptional
precision. That the tax cuts, coupled with
controls and devaluation, would generate a
surging expansion at very moderate rates
of inflation in .1972 was widely and accurately
forecast.
But the period from August 1971 to
January 1973 was in the nature of a remission
from the inflationary disease,
clearly not a cure. The 1969-70 recession
brought home the worsening problem of
persistent inflation in the face of slowdown
and recession. It presented new
empirical puzzles for the analysts of the
Phillips curve, wage equations, and expectational
inflation. And it began to prompt
the public mutterings that are being intensified
by the 1974-75 stagflation: "All
right, so you did not promise us a rose
garden without thorns-but the thorns
without the rose garden?"
Keenly aware of these problems, economists
have long been at the drawing
boards on this problem of endemic inflation.
In a close parallel with research on
cancer, economists are working on various
pieces of the inflation puzzle and producI
As gauges of the contrast between prewar and postwar
performance: unemployment averaged 18.8 percent
in the decade of depression (1931-40) in contrast
with 4.8 percent in the twenty-eight years since World
War II; the prewar peak annual rate was 24.9 percent,
the postwar peak was 6.8 percent. Annual real GNP
dropped 30 percent from 1929 to 1933; since the war,
mild declines have occurred only in three years (1949,
1954, and 1970), though 1974-75 may add two more.
Consumer prices in 1940 were 18 percent below 1929;
from 1948 to 1974, they increased 106 percent.
6 Macroeconomists were not alone in their exuberance
in the mid-1960's. On this rostrum a decade ago,
George Stigler, after reviewing the great promises and
early accomplishments of the "Quantitative Revolution
in Economics," was moved to say, "I am convinced
that economics is finally at the threshold of its Golden
Age-nay, we already have one foot through the door.
... Our expanding theoretical and empirical studies
will inevitably and irresistibly enter into the subject of
public policy, and we shall develop a body of knowledge
essential to intelligent policy formulation. And
then, quite frankly, I hope that we become the ornaments
of democratic society whose opinions on economic
policy shall prevail."