attention to their impact on each other. The
separation of monetary and fiscal policy is
one example; the separation of tax and
spending decisions is another. Congress has
made a good deal of progress in recent years
in putting spending decisions together with
their revenue or deficit consequences, but
more could be done. I have seven steps to
suggest that might make the economic policy
process work more effectively.
First, seek out decisions that should be
made less frequently and arrange to do so.
This would economize decision-making time
and enhance the chances of thoughtful,
well-informed decisions. It would free up
time and energy for managing the government
enterprise more effectively, with a
longer planning horizon. It would also reduce
the inefficiency and sense of unfairness
that goes with frequent changes of the rules.
Making the federal budget every other year
would be a major advance. Major revisions
of the tax code should occur even less frequently.
Big ticket acquisitions, such as major
weapons systems, should be reviewed thoroughly
at infrequent intervals and then put
on a steady efficient track, not constantly
revisited.

With a two-year budget, there would occasionally
be major events, such as a sudden
escalation of international tension or a sharp
unexpected shift in the economic outlook,
that would justify reopening the budget in
midstream, but the temptation to tinker frequently
should be strongly resisted. The
argument that economists cannot forecast
accurately two years in advance, while quite
true, does not undermine the case for a
multiyear budget. It simply reinforces the
point that discretionary fiscal policy is
hazardous and ought to be viewed with great
skepticism whether the budget is annual or
biennial.

Second, seek out decisions that need not
be made at all and stop making them. Some
spending programs could be consolidated
into block grants or devolved to the states,
not necessarily in the interest of smaller
government, but in the interest of greater
responsiveness to local needs and a less
cluttered federal decision schedule. In other
cases, the responsibility is clearly federal-as
in defense-but Congress would be doing its
job more effectively if it concentrated on
major policy issues rather than on details of
program management.

Third, in the executive branch, consolidate
authority for tax, budget, andfiscalpolicy
in a single cabinet department. The department
could retain the name Treasury, but
might better be called the Department of
Economic Affairs. The Secretary of Economic
Affairs should have a high level chief
economist or economic council with a strong
professional staff. The chief economist should
work closely with the budget director who
also should report to the Secretary. The purpose
would be to bring together economic
decisions now made in OMB, CEA, and
Treasury under one high-level responsible
person, to relieve the president of the duty
of adjudicating among so many potentially
warring power centers, and to increase the
chances of building a highly professional
permanent economic staff one step removed
from the short-run political concerns of the
White House.

Fourth, streamline the congressional
committee structure to reduce the number of
steps in the budget process. The authorizing
and appropriating functions should be combined
in a single set of "program committees,
" one for each major area of public
spending. This would imply a single defense
committee, for example, and a social insurance
committee. The tax committees
should handle the revenue side-not additional
spending programs as at present.
The budget committees would be charged
with considering fiscal policy and putting the
spending and revenue sides together into a
budget to be passed by the whole congress.
The Joint Economic Committee should celebrate
the important contributions it made
to economic understanding in the days before
the budget process and then close up
shop.

Fifth, bring monetary and fiscal policy
into the same conversation. This end could be
furthered by closer formal links between the
central bank and the Department of Economic
Affairs to dramatize the need for consultation
and interaction. The Federal Reserve
chairman should make a report to the