should. Serious students, however, offer
widely different estimates of the contributions
of other factors: the quality of schooling,
conventional capital services, R&D, and
the influence of cyclical or other forces affecting
intensity of resource use. The impact
of higher energy prices on the substitution
of labor for capital in the operation of existing
energy-using equipment and on the
post-1973 slowdown of capital deepening is
equally unclear, though possibly very important.
Most analyses leave a substantial
part of the retardation unconnected with
any identified and measured contributory
source, and they disagree about the timewhether
after 1973 or as early as the latter
1960's-when that unspecified residual retardation
made its appearance.'2
In this state of factual uncertainty, it is
not hard to propose estimates of the sources
of retardation which assign substantial responsibility
to factors connected with the
government's welfare and regulatory activities.
We, therefore, find William Fellner asking:
"...whether, directly or indirectly [the
analyses of the retardation] do not suggest
that the weakening of the productivity trend
is attributable in part to changes in the
socio-political environment that are of recent
origin or that have cumulated to a
'critical mass"' (p. 4).
The suggested mode of operation of these
factors is, first, through a decline in the rate
of capital deepening; second, through a decline
of worker effort symptomized by absenteeism
and by a drop in hours worked
relative to hours paid; third, by a disinclination
for risky, innovatory effort, whose
manifestation is the observed slowdown in
the residual measures of total factor productivity
growth; and fourth, through the diversion
of resources to regulatory compliance,
the benefits of which do not register in
measured output even when they should.
These sources of retardation whether great
or small-the "suspects," as Fellner calls
them-are arguably associated with characteristic
features of our mixed economy,
even if they are not exclusively due to them.
The first of those features is the widening
difference between before- and after-tax
marginal rates of return to work, saving,
investment, and risk taking. The magnitude
of the rise in these rates is indicated by the
overall increase of total government expenditures
from 20 percent of GNP in
1947-49 to 28 percent in 1963-65 and again
to over 32 percent in 1977-79.13 The incentive
effects of the tax increases are still imperfectly
understood, but there is little
reason to suppose they are not distinctly
unfavorable.'4 Allied to the effects of rising
tax burdens is the possible effect of the
cumulating "social security wealth" of individuals
on savings and that of other insurance
and income-support programs on
work.'5 Next, there are the effects of burgeoning
regulatory activity. These go beyond
the direct resource costs of compliance
already mentioned. There are also indirect
costs and risks of obtaining administrative
and judicial clearance for new projects, the
diversion of R&D expenditure to meet environmental
and safety standards, and the
hazards of possible future changes in regulatory
requirements. Finally, there are the
manifold effects of erratic and accelerating
inflation.
12Some representative references which illustrate the
variety and uncertainty of the results obtained by different
investigators are: Edward Denison, especially ch.
9; J. R. Norsworthy, Michael Harper, and Kent Kunze,
pp. 387-421, and the accompanying discussion and
reports by Peter Clark, Martin Baily, Denison, and
Michael Wachter; Laurits Christainsen and Haveman;
Robert Coen and Bert Hickman; Kendrick (1980); M.
Ishaq Nadiri.
13See Economic Report of the President (1980, Table
B-72).
14See James Tobin, Lecture III.
'3The large effect shown in Feldstein's original,
much-noticed time-series analysis (1974) has been
thrown into doubt by the discovery of a flaw in his
computer program. In a forthcoming NBER working
paper, he now finds a smaller but still significant effect.
Such time-series estimates remain uncertain because it
is hard to measure expected Social Security benefits
and hard to separate the effects of Social Security
wealth on saving from those of other variables during
periods of relative stability, as in samples covering the
postwar years alone. The conclusion that Social Security
benefits work to reduce saving, however, is sup-
ported by other studies, based on samples of individual
households and on cross-country evidence, to which
Feldstein refers in his new working paper.