velopment (R&D), and of what we might call
technical innovations. On the other hand, TFP
improvement, once purged of the changes in
the quality of labor and/or the direct contributions
of human capital, makes one think of
externalities of different kinds -economies of
scale, spillovers, and systematic complementarities.
And finally, real cost reduction, to my
mind, makes one think like an entrepreneur or
a CEO, or a production manager.
I think it would be perfectly fair to characterize
my presentation today as a paean in
praise of "real cost reduction" as a standard
label for R'. Labels do not change the underlying
reality, but they may change the
way we look at it and the way we think about
it. They also can lead us to understand it better.
Thinking in terms of real cost reduction
has certainly done all this for me, as I have
tried to sort out the many puzzles and complexities
that surround the process of economic
growth.
Let me try to take you down the path I traveled.
In the first place, real cost reduction
(RCR) is probably on the mind of most business
executives, production managers, etc., at
some point or another in any given week, let
alone in any given month or year. It is a major
path to profit in good times, and a major defense
against adversity in bad times. Most U.S.
firms that have downsized in recent years did
so with RCR in mind. So, too, did the firms
that computerized their payrolls and other accounts.
And so also did those who shifted to
what they considered more modern management
techniques. I recall going through a
clothing plant in Central America, where the
owner informed me of a 20-percent reduction
in real costs, following upon his installation of
background music that played as the seamstresses
worked. And then there is the story of
two Chilean refrigerator firms that ended up as
parts of a single conglomerate at one point.
The new management reduced the number of
models from something like 24 to two, making
agreements to import other models while exporting
these two. The end result was that output
more than doubled, while the labor force
was cut to less than half, and even the capital
stock (at replacement cost) was significantly
reduced. This sounds like (alnd is really) economies
of scale, but they would not be detected
by our usual measures, as both labor force and
capital stock went down. And we all have seen
cases where, say, an office's real costs were
reduced when a martinet of a manager was replaced
by someone more reasonable. But we
have also seen cases where real costs were reduced
when a very lax manager was replaced
by someone more strict.
It has long been my song that there are at
least 1001 ways to reduce real costs and that
most of them are actually followed in one part
or other of any modem complex economy,
over any plausible period (say, a decade).
Once one accepts this proposition as true, the
question then arises: Why would anybody try
to settle on just one underlying cause of real
cost reduction? The answer, I think, is mindset-
the framework in which one is thinking
at the moment. The pioneer writings of the recent
endogenous growth literature can, I think,
be said to reflect a kind of annoyance at something
like R or R' being considered exogenous.
There was an urge to surmount that inelegance
by somehow making the residual endogenous.
And in a simple growth model that meant generating
a feedback from the rest of the model
to the residual. A 1001 feedbacks would be out
of the question, but one feedback would work
just fine. Thus Paul Romer (1986) focused on
a feedback through "knowledge," with the
stock of knowledge shifting production functions
all over the economy; Robert E. Lucas,
Jr. (1988) focused on "human capital," not
on its direct and remunerated productivity, but
on the externalities that each increase in the
stock of human capital were presumed to generate.
These single feedbacks achieved the
limited purpose of endogenizing R or R'
within a specified model, but they did not represent
very well the multifaceted nature of real
cost reduction as we observe it in actuality.
And, in point of fact, both the cited authors in
their more recent writings display a deep recognition
of the subtlety and complexity of the
growth process, not really capable of being
captured through a simple feedback mechanism.
(See Romer, 1990, 1994a, b; Lucas,
1993.)
So, real cost reduction is multifaceted and
everywhere around us. Where does that get us?
Or how can we get anywhere in the face of
such complexity? The next step is to recognize
that in spite of its complexity, real cost reduction
can be reduced to a single metric, and can