Social insurance is a subject I have been
studying for nearly 40 years. The intellectual
and policy revolution in social insurance that is
occurring around the world is among the most
significant and positive developments of current
economics.1

Social insurance programs have become the
most important, the most expensive, and often
the most controversial aspect of government
domestic policy, not only in the United States
but also in many other countries, including developing
and industrialized nations. In the
United States, these programs include Social
Security retirement, disability, and survivor insurance,
unemployment insurance, and Medicare
insurance for those age 65 and older.
Together these programs accounted for 37
percent of federal government spending and
more than 7 percent of GDP in 2003. These
ratios have increased rapidly in the past and are
projected to increase even faster in the future
because of the more rapid aging of the
population.

I will discuss how the major forms of social
insurance could be improved by shifting to a
system that combines government insurance with
individual investment-based accounts: unemployment
insurance savings accounts (UISAs)
backed up by a government line of credit, per-
sonal retirement accounts (PRAs) that supplement
ordinary pay-as-you-go Social Security
benefits, and personal retirement health accounts
(PRHAs) that finance a range of Medicare
choices. I think that such reforms would
raise economic well-being and are also appealing
on broader philosophical grounds.
Several nations are now doing this for their
retirement programs, including such diverse
countries as Australia and Mexico, England and
China, Chile and Sweden (Feldstein, 1998a;
Feldstein and Horst Siebert, 2002). The focus
by governments around the world on social
insurance pension reform is driven in part by the
realization that the aging of their populations
implies that the tax rates required to fund social
insurance pension benefits will rise rapidly if
the programs are not changed.
The impetus for broader social insurance reform
comes from the recognition that existing
programs have substantial undesirable effects on
incentives and therefore on economic performance.
Unemployment insurance (UI) programs
raise unemployment. Retirement pensions induce
earlier retirement and depress saving. And health
insurance programs increase medical costs. Governments
are driven by a desire to reduce the
economic waste and poor macroeconomic performance
that these disincentives create and to avoid
the resulting tax consequences, as well as the
increased tax cost, of the aging population.
Economic research has helped policy officials
to recognize these undesirable effects and
to redesign social insurance programs. The pace
of reform and the nature of the program changes
differ from country to country, reflecting initial
conditions and local political realities. Reforms
are inevitably only partial and part of an ongoing
process. But the reforms generally make the
programs more economically efficient, providing
more protection relative to the financial
costs and the economic distortions. I will examine
some of the favorable changes that have
already occurred in U.S. unemployment, retirement,
and health care programs.
Before looking at these specific types of social
insurance, I want to discuss three general