Walrasian equilibrium that allows for all
the imperfections and frictions that explain
why the natural rate is bigger than
zero, ancl eveni less about the optimality
of such an equilibriunm if it exists.
In the new microeconomics of labor
markets and inflatioin, the principal activity
whose marginal value sets the reservation
price of employment is job search.
It is not pure leisure, for in principle persons
who choose that option are not reported
as unemployed; however, there may
be a leisure component in job seeking.
A crucial assumption of the theory is
that search is significantly more efficient
when the searcher is unemployed, but
almost no evidence has been advanced on
this point. Members of our own profession
are adept at seeking and finding new jobs
without first leaving their old ones or
abandoning not-in-labor-force status. We
do not know how many quits and new hires
in manufacturing are similar transfers, but
some of them must be; if all reported
accessions were hires of unemployed workers,
the mean duration of unemployment
would be only about half what it is in fact.
In surveys of job mobility among blue
collar workers in 1946-47 (see Lloyd
Reynolds, pp. 2 14-15, and Herbert Parnes,
pp. 158-59), 25 percent of workers who
quit had new jobs lined up in advance.
Reynolds found that the main obstacle
to mobility without unemployment was
not lack of information or time, but simply
"anti-pirating" collusion by employers.
A considerable amount of search activity
by unemployed workers appears to be
an unpro(luctive consequence of dissatisfaction
and frustration rather than a
rational quest for improvement. This was
the conclusion of Reynolds' survey twentyfive
years ago, p. 215, and it has been reemphasized
for the contemporary scene by
Robert Hall, and by Peter Doeringer and
Michael Piore for what they term the
secondary labor force. Reynolds found
that quitting a job to look for a new one
while unemployed actually yielded a better
job in only a third of the cases. Lining up a
new job in advance was a more successful
strategy: two-thirds of such changes
turned out to be improvements. Today,
according to the dual labor market hypothesis,
the basic reason for frequent and
long spells of unemployment in the secondary
labor force is the shortage of good jobs.
In any event, the contention of some
natural rate theorists is that employment
beyond the natural rate takes time that
would be better spent in search activity.
Why do workers accept such employment?
An answer to this question is a key element
in a theory that generally presumes
that actual behavior reveals true preferences.
The answer giveIn is that workers
accept the additional employment only
because they are victims of inflation illusion.
One form of inflation illusion is overestimation
of the real wages of jobs they
now hold, if they are employed, or of jobs
they find, if they are unemployed and
searching. If they did not under-estimate
price inflation, employed workers would
more often quit to search, and unemployed
workers would search longer.
The force of this argument seems to me
diluted by the fact that price inflation
illusion affects equally both sides of the
job seeker's equation. He over-estimates
the real value of an immediate job, but he
also over-estimates the real values of jobs
he might wait for. It is in the spirit of this
theorizing to assume that money interest
rates respond to the same correct or incorrect
inflationary expectations. As a
first approximation, inflation illusion has
no substitution effect on the margin between
working and waiting.
It does have an income effect, causing
workers to exaggerate their real wealth.
In which direction the income effect
would work is not transparent. 1)oes
greater wealth, or the illusion of greater