economics courses, sections on trade
policy spend considerable time addressing national
defense exceptions, the optimum tariff
argument, the infant industry argument, secondbest
arguments, and other arguments for protection.
While attention is paid to the reasons
why these arguments may not be correct, focus
nonetheless centers on the exceptions to the
case for free trade, rather than on the reasons
for it. While this may be inevitable as a way
of reasoning, the temptation to draw inappropriate
inferences seems high.

An example will illuminate the argument.
Whereas theory suggests criteria for departures
from laissez-faire free trade which normally
would result in different levels of
protection for different industries, a widely
used prescription for policy makers is that, if
there is to be protection, a uniform tariff is
usually preferable to any alternative structVre.
This proposition rests on several considerations.
First, only a uniform tariff can generate
a uniform rate of effective protection in the
import-competing sectors and, if different
goods are subject to different rates of tariff,
the resulting differences in effective rates of
protection will lead to resource misallocation
even within the import-competing industries
and have no relation to underlying "dynamic"
or market-failure considerations. Second, a
uniform tariff simplifies customs administration,
making evasion and/or bribery of customs
officials more difficult than a varying rate
structure. Third, a uniform tariff greatly reduces
the opportunities for resource losses in
rent-seeking and lobbying. Fourth, given international
prices, international value added is
more likely to be maximized under a uniform
tariff structure than under a variable one.
None of these arguments is sufficient to
prove that a uniform tariff is optimal. And, indeed,
it is straightforward to develop models
in which a uniform tariff is nonoptimal, especially
in the presence of income-distribution
considerations. In theory, the costs of protection
can be minimized by imposing higher
tariffs or taxes on goods whose supply and demand
is relatively more price inelastic.
Those arguments, as put forward, are all
couched in terms of demonstrating the "falsity"
of the proposition that a uniform tariff is preferable
to variable tariff rates and that there is a
departure from uniformity that can potentially
improve welfare. But the difficulty with that formulation
is that it does not provide a criterion
for which departures from uniformity might
improve welfare, because a model considering,
for example, income-distribution considerations,
cannot simultaneously address issues of corruption
and administration. And, the fact that
income-distribution considerations can warrant a
nonuniform tariff structure does not prove that
any nonuniform tariff structure is preferable to
a uniform one! As such, a negative result gives
little or no guide for policy. Nonetheless, it arms
lobbyists and others with ammunition to discredit
technocrats' efforts to maintain a less irrational
structure of protection.

Some good theoretical papers would have
done less damage, or at least given less aid and
comfort to policy positions that were clearly
not those intended in the analyses, if the authors
had taken greater pains to note the limitations
to their analyses, and the other factors
that would have to be taken into account, before
their results were applied to policy.
In that regard, it is often overlooked that most
policy implementation is carried out by government
officials who cannot be expected to have
advanced degrees, and sometimes even undergraduate
degrees, in economics. In many instances
(including formulae for optimal tariff
differentiation), the degree of sophistication
needed to interpret research results is well beyond
that which most bureaucrats will have. As
pointed out by Johnson (1970 p. 101):
...The fundamental problem is that, as
with all second-best arguments, determination
of the conditions under which a
second-best policy actually leads to an
improvement in social welfare requires
detailed theoretical and empirical investigation
by a first-best economist ... it is
therefore very unlikely that a second-best
welfare optimum will result based on
second-best arguments.

C. Good Theory Assuming

Counterfactual Situations
The final abuse of theory was primarily a
fault of inappropriate stylized facts. Nonetheless,
in many instances, analysts assumed
signs of variables that were certainly questionable,