I consider the strongest argumnent for the twodeflator
approach.
But there are other pluses as well. First, at
the aggregate economy level, the two-deflator
approach comes very close to the traditional
approach. In rate-of-growth terms, we have
(R */y) = gy S- skgk * SL gL *, compared with
(Rly) =g - Skgk -SLgN, where g refers to
growth rate, and y to GDP. K* differs from K
in being built up from gross investment deflated
by the GDP deflator, while K is built up
from gross investment deflated by the investment
deflator of GDP. L * is in principle much
more refined than N (number of workers), but
its measurement can be influenced by a widening
or narrowing skill premium. (R */y)
likewise differs from Jorgenson's residual
(R'/y) = gy - Yjskjgkj - 1ise gf mainly in his
use of different capital deflators for different
categories of capital. (The implicit labor
breakdown in L * is much finer even than
Jorgenson's, but Jorgenson does not have to
contend with the possibilities of widening or
narrowing skill premiums -at least not
among the labor categories he works with,
which are typically broken down by gender,
age, education, occupation, industry, and employmnent
status.)
The bottom line is that when Beyer compares
his two-deflator results, at the national
aggregate level, with those of others using different
methods, he finds on the whole only
modest differences. [See Beyer (1996);
Harberger (1998).]
When one uses the two-deflator method at
the industry level, one often has the possibility
to adjust the quantity variable so as to make it
correspond with that of the more traditional
approach. Thus, we may start by using dy)e (=
pjdyj + yjdpj) as the quantity variable, and calculate
a residual Rj* using that concept. Then
we may get an adjusted residual by taking
R yjdpj. This is easy to do so long as we
have decent data on dpj, the relative price of
j, which we often do at the branch or industry
level. When Jorgenson's residuals are compared
with the two-deflator residuals, with and
without price adjustment, I find the differences
without adjustment to be small enough to be
quite acceptable. With adjustment, the degree
of agreement between the two approaches is
quite notable (85 percent of differences less
than one percentage point of per annium
growth). [See Robles ( 1997); Ilarberger
(1998).]
When one gets down to the firm level, the
two-deflator method is in its element. Rarely
do we have decent time series on the price index
of a firm' s output. Treating many firrns in
one industry, one might then give all of them
the same price index-that of the industry. At
that point the distribution of adjusted TFP residuals
among the firms would end up differing
from the original two-deflator distribution
only by a constant. When expressed in percentage
terms we vould have (R)' ly)) = g4i -
*kj j ge*, for each fim j without adjustment,
while with adjustment we would have
R]*Iy1 = the same expression minus go, the
rate of growth of the industry's relative ptice
index (the same for all firms).
So in the great bulk of cases one ends up
with something quite like the two-deflator
method when working at the individual firm
level. The consolation is that the residual
terms of individual firms, calculated for the
whole economy, add up to a residual term
for the aggregate-in the sense that outputs
sum to GDP, the L]* sum to L * for the economy,
the Kj* to K* for the economy, etc. For
more details on methodology, see Harberger
(1998).