Interest in health economics has soared over
the past three decades, stimulated by intellectual
innovations, greater availability of data,
and, most importantly, a surge in health care
spending from 6 to 14 percent of GDP.' An
11 -fold increase2 in the number of Ph.D.s has
enabled many professional schools, government
agencies,3 and research institutes to add
health economists to their staffs. Nevertheless,
the health care debate of 1993-1994 benefited
much less than it could have from the results
of their research.
In this lecture I identify the primary sources
of modern health economics and describe interactions
between the discipline and the field
of health, drawing heavily on my personal experience.
I then turn to the question of why
economists did not have more impact on
health care reform. I report and analyze the
answers of health economists, economic theorists,
and practicing physicians to a survey I
conducted in 1995. My principal conclusion is
that value differences among economists, as
well as among all Americans, are a major barrier
to effective policy-making. I discuss the
implications of the importance of values for
economics and conclude the lecture with my
recommendations for health care reformrecommendations
based on my values as well
as my understanding of health economics.
I. The Past
In 1963 a seminal paper by Kenneth Arrow
discussed risk aversion, moral hazard, asymmetrical
information, philanthropic externalities,
and numerous other topics that have since
played major roles in health economics research.
4 He saw that uncertainty about health
status and about the consequences of care was
the key to understanding the health sector from
both positive and normative perspectives. As
Arrow wrote, "Recovery from disease is as
unpredictable as its incidence" ( 1963 p. 951 ).
At the same time that Arrow was depicting
the theoretical landscape, Martin Feldstein
was pioneering in the application of quantitative
methods such as 2-stage least squares,
principal component analysis, and linear programming
to the estimation of production
functions and other important economic aspects
of medical care. His numerous papers
analyzing the British National Health Service
formed the basis for his Ph.D. thesis at Oxford
University (Feldstein, 1967).
A third line of work that has had a significant
influence on health economics also began
in the early 1960's with the National
Bureau of Economic Research Conference
on Investment in Human Beings (1962) and
Gary S. Becker's treatise on human capital