derives from her own consumption; nor, yet
more tellingly, does it derive from the utility of
her child (as the child's utility depends on its
own consumption). It enters the utility function
as a separate term.
What, then, could account for a "warm glow"?
Parent-to-child bequests are a form of gift. If there
is any type of economic transaction that is gov-
erned by norms, it is the giving of gifts.33 Parent-
to-child bequests also occur within families.
Therefore, they should also be affected by the
norms of family life. We have already seen one
example of such norms (Friedan's portrait of the
proper place of women in the early 1960s).
The norms of family life are not constant. They
vary by culture. They also change over time. As
the nature of the ideal family has shifted, so has
the ideal bequest. Actual bequests have changed in
tandem. For example, the ideal sixteenth century
Anglo-Saxon family was dynastic. The lineage
passed from father to oldest son.34 Fathers then  left the bulk of their estates to their oldest sons. In
the twenty-first century, in the ideal family, sib-
lings are equal. Most bequests are now evenly  divided between them.35
Summary.-Economic outcomes, such as the
consumption of the parent and the utility of the
child, are one determinant of bequests. But an-
other possible determinant is parents' views re-
garding how they should behave toward their
children. Just as Friedan's suburban housewives
waxed their floors, because they thought that is  what housewives should do, parents who leave
bequests derive a warm glow from bequests
because that is what they think they should do
for their children. Ricardian equivalence then
illustrates how odd neutralities can occur in
models that fail to take such norms into account.
A comment by David Romer (2001, 539)
tells us where we should venture next. He has
remarked that "quantitatively important" viola-
tions of Ricardian equivalence and of the per-
manent income/life-cycle hypothesis occur for
the same reasons. Ricardian equivalence is not
important for us as an empirical aspect of mac-
roeconomics. There are so many reasons other
than the role of norms for its violation. But it
does give us an initial window on the type of
motivation missing in classical macroeconom-
ics. Inclusion of such motivation will give us a
new perspective on the consumption function. It
allows us to return to a view in which consump-
tion will depend on current income, just as its
inclusion makes it natural to believe that social
security transfers will affect savings and con-
sumption, even in a world without frictions.
V. Consumption and Current Income
This takes us to the second neutrality. Ac-
cording to this result, other than its contribution
to a consumer's wealth, current income has no
independent effect on the consumption of a
utility-maximizing consumer.
Milton Friedman (1957) derived such
consumption-income neutrality in the two-
period model of Irving Fisher. In this model, the
consumer chooses her consumption between
two periods. She maximizes her intertemporal
utility function, given by the function U(cl, C2):
c, denotes her current consumption in the first
period; c2 denotes consumption in the second
period.36 If she maximizes U(c1, c2), a dollar of
income earned today will have the same effect
on her current consumption as a discounted
dollar earned in the next period. Thus, her con-
sumption will depend only on the discounted
value of her current and future income and the
rate of interest. This proposition is easy to
prove. It generalizes to many different com-
modities and to many different time periods,