income is withdrawn from personal accounts,
which can be bequeathed if the individual dies
before exhausting the account or before annu-
itizing the accumulated balance.
The analysis of these three types of distortion  should make it clear that the shift to a "notional"
defined contribution system would help only a  little to reduce the adverse effects of the current
pay-as-you-go system. A notional defined con-
tribution system is one in which each individual
has an account that is credited with his tax
payments and with a notional rate of return on
his accumulated balance, but in which there is
no actual investment in financial assets. The
notional rate of return that is feasible in the long
term is the modified Samuelson return, i.e., the
rate of growth of the tax base. Since there is no
real capital accumulation, the reduction in the
present value of consumption is not changed.
The distortion in labor supply and in the form of
compensation is reduced (but not eliminated)
because individuals can more clearly see the
link between their taxes and their future bene-
fits. A notional defined contribution system also
reduces the distortion in retirement decisions
because individuals reduce their future benefits
if they retire early and increase them by delayed
retirement. But even with this improved trans-
parency, the low implicit pay-as-you-go rate of
return leaves a substantial distortion in work
and compensation incentives.
Although the scope for reducing the substan-
tial deadweight losses of the pure pay-as-you-go
system and for increasing the present value of
all future consumption should provide a strong
incentive for a change in policy, they are not the
reason that has driven the political process in
many countries to move from a pure pay-as-
you-go to a mixed system or to consider such a
change. The primary driving force is the recog-
nition that the increasing age of the population
will require a very large tax increase or benefit
cut if nothing is done to change the existing
system. This is not a temporary effect of the
baby boom generation reaching retirement age
but a permanent result of the trend to increased
longevity. This demographic change is signifi-
cant not only because it drives the political
process but also because it increases the poten-
tial gain of making such a change.
The desirability of shifting to an investment-
based or mixed system depends on four issues: (a)
the transition process and its cost; (b) the ongoing  administrative costs; (c) the riskiness of financial
investments; and (d) the effect on the income
distribution and especially on the poorest group. I
have done work on these issues during the past
decade, both alone and with colleagues Jeffrey
Liebman, Elena Ranguelova, and Andrew Sam-
wick. I will now summarize what I have learned.
I commented earlier on the transition prob-
lem when I discussed my experience with Pres-
ident Reagan. The common view that the
transition from a pure pay-as-you-go system to
a mixed system requires the transition genera-
tion to "pay double"-once to save for their
own retirement and once to meet obligations to
existing retirees-is wrong. As examples of
what could be done, Andrew Samwick and I
(1998a, 1998b, 2002) showed how the projected
rise in the pay-as-you-go tax rate to more than
19 percent19 could be avoided if individuals
contribute just 1.5 percent of wages out-of-
pocket to personal retirement accounts. The key
to the transition is using personal retirement
account annuities to supplement the pay-as-
you-go benefits. The growth of the PRA annu-
ities offsets the slowdown of the pay-as-go-
benefits that results from not increasing the tax
rate as the population ages.
There is no free lunch in this process. The
key is that additional saving during the transi-
tion years can reduce long-run costs. This extra
saving could be voluntary, induced by a match-
ing PRA contribution out of existing payroll tax
receipts.20 Although the matching would reduce
the "trust fund" balances, the transition need not
involve borrowing by the Social Security sys-
tem from general revenue (Feldstein and Sam-
wick, 2002).21