C. Demonstration of the Viability of
Alternative Trade Policies
Research on the contrast between East
Asian and other developing countries and rea-
sons for it obviously turned out to be a major
contributing factor in influencing thinking
about policy. In a way, research on East Asian
experience provided a final blow to the earlier
uncritical acceptance of the stylized facts. For,
the East Asian experiences demonstrated, as
nothing else could have, the feasibility and vi-
ability of alternative trade policies: it was no
longer possible to associate comparative ad-
vantage with reliance on primary commodity
exports, and the East Asian experience cer-
tainly put an end to the belief that developing
countries could not develop rapidly when re-
lying on integration with the international
economy.'
The experience of the East Asian exporters
did several things. Most important, it provided
concrete evidence that a developing country
could achieve industrialization without relying
on domestic markets to absorb almost all
additional output. That demonstrated the fal-
lacy of the earlier view that industrialization
could take place only through import substi-
tution.45 Also, the East Asian trade regimes of-
fered significant opportunities for empirical
research, and the evidence mounted that prop-
erties formerly thought to be those of all de-
veloping countries were, in fact, properties
resulting from inner-oriented trade and pay-
ments regimes.
It cannot be said that either research results
or the contrast in economic performance alone
led to the change in policies in other devel-
oping countries.46 Both research (especially
that which brought the sharply contrasting ex-
periences of the East Asian exporters and the
import-substituting countries into focus) and
experience contributed.
Whether one should regard the East Asian
experience as entirely separate from economic
theory, however, is an interesting question. As
already mentioned, Tsiang (1985) was him-
self an international economist, and it was in
significant part his efforts that led the Tai-
wanese authorities to abandon inner-oriented
policies and attempt to develop through ex-
ports. The theory of comparative advantage
was, at least in that instance, a pillar on which
policy was built. And, while a variety of fac-
tors no doubt contributed to the Korean adop-
tion of outer-oriented trade policies after 1960,
the favorable experience of Taiwan undoubt-
edly facilitated the willingness of decision
makers to try the new approach.
The East Asian exporters put to rest the
mistaken belief that developing countries re-
lying on the international market would forever
be specialized in the production of primary
commodities. They also showed that rates
of growth well above those realized even in
the most rapidly growing import-substitution
countries such as Brazil and Turkey could be
realized.
IV. What Lessons Can Be Learned for Research
in New Applied Fields?
It is difficult to draw generalizations based
on the evolution of analysis, empirical re-
search, and policy in one applied field. None-
theless, in the hope that insights from other
applied areas may reinforce or amend the list,
the effort seems worthwhile.
Perhaps the most obvious generalization
from the various factors that have been dis-
cussed is that empirical research which tests
for the presence and order of magnitude of
stylized facts which are used in modelling and