is repeated in business investment demand,
housing demand, public expenditures,
exports, and imports. Elaboration
essentially means taking a closer look at demand
side components by types of demand.
The mainstream model of macro economic
thought has thus become a detailed
system of demand analysis, but if it is to be
a closed system, it will also have to include
corresponding detail on the national income
side of the social accounts. If this is done
fully, there will have to be analyses of factor
rewards, factor use, and pricing. The development
of factor demand goes beyond capital
formation, which appears as a demand
for final goods in the GNP, and takes up
an explanation of wage income. An adequate
explanation of wage income cannot
avoid the explicit treatment of physical
production involving labor input as well as
capital input. The demand for labor, like
the demand for capital, is supply side analysis.
While the demand for capital enters directly
as a component of total demand, the
demand for labor, together with wage formation,
enters national income, and only
after expenditure does it enter final demand
for GNP. To the extent that labor productivity
affects wage determination and also
price formation, we find supply-side factors
influencing inflation and consequently the
overall performance of the economy. Labor
demand can also be associated with training.
The training component is, in fact,
investment in human rather than fixed
capital. Looked at in this way, factor demand
for labor and factor demand for fixed
capital are simply different, but related,
aspects of total investment.
Behind the IS-LM diagram or other simplified
renditions of the aggregate demand
model lie many supply-side relationships.
Not only is the supply side in the background,
but it also plays a more essential
role once it is recognized that the simplified
model is actually incomplete. If we were to
assume the existence of money illusion, it
would be possible to consider the IS-LM
system as a closed system of relationships
depending on nominal income and nominal
interest rates. I find this approach theoretically
unsatisfactory. That simple system
exists only as an aggregative approximation
for a given price level. If we assume no
money illusion and, more properly, I believe,
the need to determine the aggregate
price level, then the IS-LM diagram does
not provide a closed system analysis, and
we must extend the system to include the
whole supply-side apparatus of production
relationships, factor demand, and factor
supply.
It is well known that Keynes included
the aggregate supply function in the General
Theory, but it was introduced in his
chapter on "The Principle of Effective Demand.
" That part of his analysis dealing
with supply has been largely played down
by the profession at large-not by all students
of macroeconomics.' Also, by way of
side comment, Keynes probably confused
the issues by making labor supply dependent
on the nominal wage rate, assuming
the existence of money illusion, and by not
treating the stock of capital as an explicit
variable.
If the demand relationships explaining
the components of the GNP are disaggregated
into a highly detailed set, it does not
necessarily mean that the supply side must
be equally disaggregated to a similar extent,
as long as the total flow of income and
purchasing power to be directed towards
the expenditure flow can be generated. The
detailed expenditure flow will, however, involve
price relatives. That is a consequence
of disaggregation. An aggregate supply-side
explanation that generates only an average
price level for output as a whole can be
adequate, provided separate prices, needed
for the price-relatives, can be explained in
terms of a relationship to the overall price
or wage level. This is much like the use of a
term structure relationship in credit market
analysis to explain the spectrum of interest
rates, given one strategic rate.
It is, however, more satisfactory, and
more revealing, to explain the whole set of
prices, one by one, on the basis of costs
in individual sectors. These sector prices, on
the side of production, are then combined
with input weights into the several final deISee
Sidney Weintraub (1956, 1957).