by many firms as a useless and unprofitable
course of conduct.
V. The Demand for Commodities and
the Demand for Labor
I referred earlier to the case (exemplified
by fresh flowers) in which the holding of
inventories is by definition impossible, and
in which the entire response to unexpected
shifts in supply or demand must be a price
change-at least, given perfectly competitive
markets. This case may be only a trivial
curiosity when we deal with commodities.
But it is a matter of considerable importance
when we recognize that an inability to store
output is, by definition, the case for services-
whether they are final products, or
are services used in production. The largest
class of services, of course, is the labor
services used for the production of goods. If
the price of labor services was a flexible,
continually market-determined price, the
price of labor services should respond rather
sharply to random shocks to the demand for
goods produced using labor. Indeed, prices
of labor should, in general, be more variable
than prices of commodities, on the reasonable
assumption that the supply of labor is
less price elastic than the supply of cooperating
factors of production."
In fact, of course, the evidence is undeniable
that wage rates normally fluctuate far
less than do prices. This anomaly seems to
require an "institutional" explanation, or,
more fundamentally, a theory that explains
the institutions that produce these results.
Such explanations often run in terms of
" set-up," "transactions," and "information"
costs, that make implicit or explicit contracts
mutually beneficial both to workers and to
employers, despite the fact that such contracts
necessarily imply substantial intermittent
unemployment, as well as occasional
labor shortages.12 An extensive literature has
developed along these lines, greatly advanced
in Arthur Okun's posthumous Prices and
Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis. The
conclusion of Okun's analysis, of course, is
that models of the labor market that assume
continuous market clearing- and therefore
continuous full employment-are erroneous.
And, as a result, critiques of government
stabilization policy-as powerless to improve
economic welfare even when properly used
(or unable to damage the national interest
when badly used)-necessarily fail.
VI. A Price-Theoretic Version of
the Business Cycle
One well-known critique of stabilization
policy is that associated with Robert Lucas
and Robert Barro. However, Lucas and Barro
accept the reality of a business cycle, involving
serially-correlated changes in real output,
although they still deny the ability of monetary
or fiscal policy to affect the economy.
The price-theoretic approach of Lucas and
Barro stands, however, at an opposite pole
from that of Okun. For instead of trying to
model the imperfect flexibility of wage rates
in a real world, wages are sometimes assumed
not to exist. In one version (1977) of
Lucas' theory of the business cycle, we have
a world reminiscent of J. B. Say, in which
there are no firms, no hired labor, but only
"yeoman farmers."'3 Thus, there are only
prices and profits-no wage rates. Actually,
this model could also accommodate simple
manufacturers- craftsmen without hired
workers-as did the model world of Say.
Needless to say, competition is perfect, and
information free and nearly complete.
1 " To be sure, the presumed rational expectations
response to fluctuations in the demand for commodities,
through planned additions to inventories or the drawing-
down of inventories, would tend also to stabilize the
demand for labor. However, given the costs of commodity
storage, it can easily be shown that this response is
consistent with the presumption stated in the text: that
labor prices should fluctuate more than goods prices.  12On the other hand, the explicitly or implicitly
contractual nature of the employment relationship not
only contributes to the explanation of wage rate insensitivity,
but also allows producers greater freedom to use
temporary layoffs, along with inventory changes, as a
means of adjustment to temporary fluctuations in the
demand for output in a manner which may be economically
efficient both for workers and for employers. The
relationship between inventory behavior and the demand
for labor has recently been interestingly explored
by Robert Topel.
13As Blinder and Fischer have recently characterized
the producers in this model.