wage structure around which individual
adjustments occur will be changed.
There are several points to note about this
process. The major gains, in terms of higher
employment, that came from lowering wages
in the face of downward aggregate demand
shocks do not accrue to particular workers in
particular firms as the result of their own
actions. Rather, the gains accrue through the
effect of generalized lower wages in reducing
prices, raising real money balances and
thereby increasing aggregate demand. Once
the assumption of flexible auction markets
and a competitive bidding down of wages by
individual workers is abandoned, it is no
longer valid to level against sticky-wage theories
the charge that they imply an irrational
failure on the part of economic agents to
pursue unexploited gains from trade. Without
the Walrasian auctioneer, the individual firms
in an economy are, as noted earlier, in a
prisoner's dilemma. The large comparative
statics gain from an aggregate nominal wage
cut does not translate into such a gain seen
from the point of view of individual firms.'0
The potential gain they see is the one that
would accrue from making a relative change.
They will indeed make such changes, but
slowly and cautiously, acting under the constraints
on relative changes spelled out
earlier.11 Only as the perceived long-term
level of W falls will the situation be different.

Since what is important for nominal wage
adjustment is the perceived level of W, expectations
about its future value will, of
course, be relevant. Within the constraints
imposed by implicit contracts, wages in individual
firms have to be adjusted to deal with
changing conditions. Since wage changes are
difficult and impose strains on long-term relationships,
the wage once set has to last for
a while, typically at least a year (and under
union contracts often longer). The expectations
that workers and employers have about
the future course of average wages and prices
will therefore exert an important influence
over the current wage decision. I do not want
here to join the controversy over the extent
to which wage setting is backward or forward
looking. But what is central to my
message is that the relevant forecast does not
assume prompt adjustment to a new equilibrium
wage but rather the more hesitant
and gradual process described above.
The appropriate framework for analyzing
the aggregate behavior of wages, therefore, is
not one in which certain macroeconomic imperfections-
information gaps or misperceptions
about the general wage and price level
-prevent the market-clearing adjustment of
wages, which themselves are perfectly flexible
in the face of relative disturbances. The
essence of the behavior of wages in response
to aggregate demand shocks is just the opposite.
Macroeconomic shocks break through
the short-run stickiness of wages and prices
in the face of relative disturbances to produce
the aggregate adjustments, albeit slow
and gradual ones, that we do in fact observe.
There is a nice paradox in all of this. A
prompt adjustment of nominal wages to aggregate
demand shocks, leaving relative
wages unchanged, can be produced only by a
system of highly flexible relative wages. Conversely,
the existence of sticky relative wages
yields long transitional periods in which firms
are adjusting individually to nominal shocks,
and produces, as a side effect, changes in
relative wage and prices.
IV. Final Reflections
The large costs which accompany disinflation
arise from the fact that society has to
0l1n his 1977 article, Robert Barro decouples the
nominal wage and employment responses to perceived
nominal shocks. He argues that even if nominal wages
are sticky, optimal contracts would call for the maintenance
of employment. Firms would vary prices to achieve
this result despite the stickiness of nominal wages.
Otherwise, says Barro, the parties would be ignoring the
unexploited gains from trade, an irrational act. This
paper is not principally concerned with price behavior.
But it is clear that the same externality argument, set
forth above with respect to wages, holds for prices.
Without auction markets or some surrogate for the
Walrasian auctioneer, the external nature of the gains
from price changes would tend to negate the force of the
Barro argument.  1 Since the macroeconomic effects of their own wage
and price decisions do not enter into economic agents'
objective functions, the Akerlof-Yellen conclusions
about the small size of losses from "near-rational"
behavior would apply to the nonauction markets I am
here describing.