similarly, as consisting of a demand
for current use or consumption plus a possible
demand for additions to inventory. Any
market-participant's demand for additions to
inventory clearly should be based upon an
expectation that the price will increase sufficiently
over some future period, at least to
cover costs of storage plus interest for that
period. Any market-participant's willingness
to supply goods from inventory should be
based on an expectation that the price will
rise insufficiently over any future period to
cover costs of storage and interest for that
period. Since expectations of future prices
are never certain, the expected prices described
should include discounts to reflect
risk aversion, or premiums to reflect the
pleasures of risk assumption.
Given the conditions that permit or require
the holding of inventories, inventories
may have either a stabilizing or a destabilizing
effect on the commodity's price, production,
and consumption. Traditionally,
however, economists have assumed that the
effect of inventories is to stabilize each of
these. We think of the wheat market, for
instance, where an entire year's new supply
(at least in either Hemisphere) becomes
available in a relatively short period of time.
Were the holding of inventories of wheat (or
wheat products) impossible, the market price
would have to fall low enough during the
harvest period to assure immediate consumption
of the entire crop. The price would then
rise high enough during the remainder of the
year to cut off all consumption-or else high
enough to make profitable the production
of wheat in greenhouses, and to reduce its
off-season consumption to the quantity so
produced. However, given the possibility of
storage of wheat or wheat products-by producers,
dealers, or intermediate or final consumers-
the price would normally fall only
enough during the harvest period to induce
the appropriate amount of inventory accumulation.
The price would then rise, during
the remainder of the year, as inventories
were drawn down, sufficiently to cover at all
times the costs of storage, interest, and the
assumption of risk from holding inventories.
Such seasonal price and inventory movements
often are approximately observable.
The recognition that not only seasonal but
also year-to-year variations may occur in the
harvest as a result of weather conditions or
civil disturbance, and that year-to-year variations
may also occur in the demand for
wheat, reflecting, say, the "business cycle,"
will induce some or many market participants
to carry over inventories of wheat
(or of its products) from one crop year to the
next (or to reduce stocks previously carried
over). Stocks held will increase or decrease as
the current market price varies relative to
what is believed to be the current "normal"
or "long-run equilibrium" price: the price
that would exactly balance normal annual
new supply and normal annual consumption.
Through this process, not only seasonal
fluctuations but also year-to-year fluctuations
of market price and of consumption are
reduced, even in the presence of substantial
year-to-year changes in production or in final
demand. Through changes in inventories,
supply or demand in any particular year, in
effect, may thus borrow from past and/or
from future years' supply or demand.
As, and to the extent, that market participants
learn of new "events" affecting or
likely to affect either future normal production
or future normal demand, the rate of
inventory accumulation or decumulation will
be varied so as to produce a new time path
of price and current consumption, associated
with an expected new equilibrium of prices
and quantities. Needless to add, this behavior
is stabilizing with respect both to prices
and quantities: at least as compared to what
would have happened if inventories could
not exist, or if storage costs-or the interest
rate-were higher. And this activity clearly
increases economic welfare.
These activities of course reflect the behavior
now described as based upon "rational
expectations." Market participants have in
their heads a "model" of how supply and
demand affect market price over time; on
the basis of that model, and of all available
information-including all new information-
about present and future production
and demand and the size of existing
inventories, agents buy for or sell from inventories
in ways that cause the market price
to move continuously toward its current normal,