This result came as a surprise to the profession,
though perhaps less so to those who
reached it, or something very like it, by an altemative
route. They were the people who
came at the problemn out of a tradition of measuring
labor productivity, and at some point
complemented output per worker with a measure
of output per unit of capital, and finally
joined the two to create a measure of total factor
productivity (TFP). The idea of total factor
productivity increasing through time was less
a shock to these people than the "growth residual"
was to those who approached its measurement
along the lines of equation ( 1) or
(1'). See Moses Abramovitz (1952, 1956)
and Solomon Fabricant (1954).
In any case, as the newly discovered residual
loomed large in our professional thinking, our
discussion centered on two potential explanations:
"human capital" and "technical advance.
" (See Robert M. Solow, 1957.) These
can be thought of as complementary explanations,
at least up to a point, with technical advance
representing truly new ways of doing
things, and the accumulation of "human capital"
representing increases in the "quality" of
the typical human agent. It was not long before
attempts were made to quantify the contribution
of improved labor quality. These came as part
of a general move toward disaggregation of the
two factors, which can be represented by:
(2) ffAy=ZiwViLi

+ z9(Pj + 6j)AKJ + R'.

Here the index i can vary over all sorts of education
and skill groups as well as categories
like gender, age, occupation, region, etc. All
these are items that may signal a different market
wage. In a similar vein, the index j would
appropriately vary over categories like the corporate,
noncorporate, and housing sectors
where, for tax if for no other reasons, different
(gross-of-tax) rates of return would presumably
prevail, even in a full equilibrium.
In an equation like (2), the presumed marginal
product of each category of labor is measured
by the wage wi . Average quality can be
measured by Q, = iwi Lil i L,, and the contribution
of change in quality to Ay, between
t and t + 1 can be calculated as Liw( i(A Q, + I /
Qt). Thus, the contribution of quality change
is already built into the first summation in (2),
but can be separately identified if we so
choose.

A focus on human capital could lead us to
a slightly different way of breaking down
1wiALi. Here we could choose some "basic
wage" w*, ideally the wage of some welldefined
category of relatively unskilled labor.
Then we could divide the remuneration wi of
any given category into a part w* which was
a reward for "raw labor" and another part
(wi - w *) which we would identify as the
reward to the human capital of a typical
worker of type i.

Using a framework like (2) has long been
the standard for careful professionals. Pioneered
by Zvi Griliches (1960, 1963), it was
utilized by Edward F. Denison (1967) and
John W. Kendrick (1973, 1976, 1977), among
others. This approach has been further developed
and carried to a high art by Dale W.
Jorgenson and Griliches ( 1967), Jorgenson et
al. (1987), and Jorgenson (1995).
The main point to be made here is that once
the residual is measured using a framework
like (2) or its equivalent, the direct, measured
contribution of human capital is captured in
the labor term 1wiALi. By direct contribution
I mean what people are paid for. Doctors earn
more than nurses, and engineers more than
draftsmen. These and similar differences are
captured in D;FiALi, which can be positive
even if XALi is zero, just from an upward reshuffling
of the same labor force. A truly accurate
measurement of type (2) would capture
all the subtle differences of quality that exist
in a modem labor force and would give each
a weight corresponding to the (gross-of-tax)
earnings that demanders are observed to pay.
We may do this imperfectly, but, in concept at
least, the residual R' as measured by (2) does
not contain any elements of quality change or
any direct contributions of human capital to
growth. This is a quite important point for it
permits us to zero in on the residual as representing
"technical change," "TFP improvement,
" and "real cost reduction."
There is no analytical reason to prefer one
of the above three terms over another, in referring
to the residual R'. But I am going a bit
out on a limb to say that a term like "technical
change" leads most economists to think of inventions,
of the products of research and development