Times. The U.S. Surgeon General, the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force, and the American
College of Physicians supported this position,
and many individual physicians changed their
practice accordingly. Intense opposition came
from the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists and the American Society of Cytology.
The contending groups finally negotiated
a compromise along the following lines: "Pap
smears should be done annually; after two or
more negative examinations the frequency can
be decreased." 16
The economist's distinction between movement
along a function and a shift in the function
is a very useful one. It is particularly applicable
in discussing the relationship between medical
care and health. At any given time in developed
countries the effects of additional medical care
on health are usually small, but over time advances
in medical science have had significant
effects on health."7 Or consider the relationship
between infant mortality and per capita income.
At any given time income is a good predictor of
infant mortality, especially post-neonatal mortality
(28 days to one year). In log-log regressions
across the 48 states in 1937 and 1965, the
income elasticity of post-neonatal mortality was
-0.53 (0.11) and -0.49 (0.12) respectively.18
The decline in post-neonatal mortality between
1937 and 1965, however, was consistent with an
elasticity of -2.00. There was undoubtedly a
shift in the function associated with the introduction
of antibiotics and other advances in
medical science (Fuchs, 1974b). In 1991 the
elasticity was -0.73 (0.12) but the change from
1965 to 1991 was consistent with an elasticity
of -1.08, suggesting a further shift in the function,
but not nearly so large as the shift between
1937 and 1965.
Economists have much to contribute to the
health field. What can they expect in exchange?
The most immediate benefit to me was the pressure
to make my lectures and research results
accessible, relevant, and credible to intelligent
but untutored and often unsympathetic audiences.
I was obliged to write clearly and simply
and to reconsider assumptions and conclusions
in economics that I might otherwise have accepted
too readily. My experience was in accord
with that of Thomas Henry Huxley (1863) who
wrote, "Some experience with popular lecturing
has convinced me that the necessity of making
things plain to uninstructed people was one of
the very best means of clearing up the obscure
corners in one's own mind."
For example, one of the questions that troubled
me for a long time is why there is such
a strong correlation between health and years
of schooling. I originally believed that this
was another manifestation of the productivityenhancing
effect of education. Schooling could
increase an individual's knowledge about the
health effects of personal behavior and medical
care options or could enable a person to better
process and act upon information about health
(Grossman, 1975). Or schooling could increase
an individual's ability to develop strategies
of self control (Richard A. Thaler and
H. M. Shefrin, 1981). I began to doubt the
schooling-causes-health hypothesis, however,
when it was observed that the favorable effect
of an additional year of schooling on health
does not diminish with increased years of
schooling. It is just as strong for those with
more than a high school education as for those
with less and continues right through graduate
school on up to the doctoral level (Grossman,
1975).19 I began to suspect that perhaps the correlation
was the result of some underlying difference
among individuals that affects both
schooling and health.
To explore this question I examined survey
data on smoking behavior collected
by colleagues in the Stanford Heart Disease
Prevention Program as part of a health