a result, raise wage rates and the capital-labor
ratio in the next generation. Yet total private
savings of the present generations would fall,
as in a conventional life-cycle analysis with
no bequests, if the decline in fertility exceeds
the greater saving for each child.
Consider next an example from tax incidence.
A tax on income from capital initially
lowers after-tax returns and discourages investment.
In the neoclassical model, capital
then falls over time until the after-tax rate of
return again equals the given rate of time
preference. In public finance jargon, a tax on
capital would be fully shifted in the long
run.

A difficulty with this conclusion is the
neoclassical assumption that fertility is fixed,
which is especially inappropriate for very
long-term changes in incidence. Fertility
would fall as capital fell in response to the
tax if fertility is positively related to per
capita income. A fall in fertility lowers preference
for present consumption and raises
the demand for investment in each child
through the interaction between the quality
and quantity of children. Then the equilibrium
after-tax rate of return must also
fall, and the tax on capital is only partially
shifted even in the long run.
The conclusion is more radical if fertility
is negatively related to per capita income
(for reasons discussed next). Fertility then
increases when the stock of capital falls.
Since the increase in fertility lowers investment
per child, the equilibrium after-tax rate
of return would have to increase. That is, we
have the paradox that a tax on capital is
eventually shifted by more than 100 percent!
Let me assure the theorists that this strange
result does not violate the second-order conditions.


Does a negative relation between fertility
and per capita income imply that children
are an "inferior" good (to use the economist's
infelicitous language)? The answer is no because
the cost of rearing children increases
when the capital-labor ratio and per capita
income rise since wage rates and the value of
parents' time spent on children rise along
with the capital-labor ratio. Fertility would
fall if the positive effect on fertility of an
increase in income is weaker than the negative
effect due to the rise in cost. The substitution
effect often dominates the income
effect in rich countries, for child care in these
countries requires considerable time and energy
of parents.

If fertility is negatively related to per capita
income, an increase in the capital-labor ratio
above its steady-state level would reduce
fertility and thereby encourage more investment
per child. The capital-labor ratio would
continue to increase over time if this positive
effect on investment dominates the negative
effect of a lower rate of return. Consequently,
a negative relation between fertility
and per capita income can destabilize what
is otherwise a stable steady state (see the
formal analysis in Robert Tamura, 1986).
Demographers have long been aware that
fertility eventually declines as a country
develops. Less well appreciated (although
see the earlier literature by R. R. Nelson,
1956; Robert M. Solow, 1956, pp. 90-91;
S. C. Tsiang, 1964, and others on low-level
" traps") is that a negative relation between a
country's fertility and its income can destabilize
a steady-state equilibrium and cause
a protracted period of rising per capita incomes.
However, although a decline in fertility
is an important stimulus in early stages of
development, it alone cannot explain sustained
growth over a century or longer. In
the absence of other forces, a growing economy
with neoclassical production functions
but without continuing technological progress
eventually moves to a stable steady
state with low fertility and high per capita
incomes.

A promising approach to sustained growth
that complements the role of fertility builds
on the special properties of education and
other learning. The important property for
this purpose is that investments in education
and other human capital are more productive
when past investments are larger. That
is to say, accumulation of knowledge and
skills in the past eases the acquisition of
additional knowledge. The mastery learning
concept in education pedagogy uses this
property to organize the teaching of mathematics
and other subjects to children (see
Benjamin S. Bloom, 1976). Such a production
technology implies that rates of return