give a breakdown by industry reveal it. Yet to
my knowledge, we have barely scratched the
surface in studying it. I find it hard to think of
more fertile soil for future research on the process
of economic growth.
(g) I do not think that we gain much by
trying to express the relation between policies
and economic growth by a series of regressions.
Cross-country growth regressions seem
hopelessly naive to longtime observers of the
growth process like myself. To us, there is too
mutch to question in regression lines that draw
much of their slope from the differences between
Sudan and Switzerland, between Bangladesh
and Brazil, or between Ceylon and
Canada. In contrast, it seems much more sensible
to look at episodes within individual
countries and to search for common elements
that characterize the passage from bad to good
growth experiences within each of the number
of countries, and for those elements that seem
to describe the good growth experiences on the
one hand and the bad ones on the other. I think
we can reach in this way a good appreciation
of the nature of the growth process, without
resorting to the straitjacket of regression lines
that seem to draw from comparisons among
very disparate countries, lessons that are supposed
to be meaningful for countries like
Bangladesh, Ceylon, and the Sudan-as well
as others at different levels-as each strives
to take the next upward step in the climb toward
modernization.
My view of cross-country growth regressions
is somewhat less negative to the extent
that they focus on the components of growth
(rate of investment, rate of return, and real
cost reduction in particular) rather than on the
overall growth rate. There is also a subtle distinction
to be drawn between two ways of
presenting cross-country regressions- (i) as
"explaining" why and how some countries
grow faster than others (not recommended),
and (ii) as simply summarizing a series of
"stylized facts" describing the experience we
observe (far preferable, and not just for its being
more modest in its claims).
V. Some Policy Implications
In approaching the question of the influence
of policy on real cost reduction in particular,
and, to a degree even on economic growth in
general, I believe that the key words are "obstructing"
and "enabling." We know from
sad experience how easy it is for governments
to adopt policies that get in the way of economic
growth and even turn it negative. We
know, too, that there is no "silver bullet," no
single magic key that by itself opens the door
to a paradise of prosperity and growth.
Broadly speaking, the easiest starting point for
a successful growth experience is a onceprosperous
economy that has suffered from
bad policies. Releasing that economy from its
trammels, correcting an accumulation of past
mistakes, can sometimes set in motion a prolonged
episode of astounding growth. A shift
from policies that obstruct to policies that enable
growth seems to lie at the heart of growth
"miracles" like those of Taiwan, Spain, Korea,
Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, and China
(among others).
The springboard for the following listing of
policy implications is the interpretation of the
growth residual as representing real cost reduction
and the ready acceptance that in the
real world RCR comes in 1001 different
forms.
(a) The first key observation is that people
must perceive real costs in order to reduce
them. Hence, policies that impede the accurate
perception of real costs are ipso facto inimical
to growth. Inflation is the most obvious, probably
the most pervasive, and almost certainly
the most noxious of such policies. If I have any
expertise based on experience in economics, it
has to be in the first-hand observation of processes
of serious inflation. So I ask you to
take my word for it: the most serious cost of
inflation is not a triangle or a trapezoid under
the demand curve for real cash balances, nor
is it the inflation tax. The most serious cost
of inflation is the blurring of economic
agents' perceptions of relative prices. This
happens because individual prices adjust in
different ways and at very different rates. A
high product price and a low input cost normally
is an invitation clamoring for new investments
to be made. This is not so during a
serious inflation, when such a signal can easily
turn out to be "here today, gone next
month" as both product and input prices continue
on their separate paths of adjustment to