system deeper and deeper, by
reducing, for example, cost functions to
production functions and the production
functions to some still more basic relationships
eventually capable of explaining
the technological change itself, we should
be able to reduce this drift. It would,
nevertheless, be quite unrealistic to expect
to reach, in this way, the bedrock of invariant
structural relationships (measurable
parameters) which, once having been
observed and described, could be used
year after year, decade after decade, without
revisions based on repeated observation.

On the relatively shallow level where the
empirically implemented economic analysis
now operates even the more invariant
of the structural relationships, in terms of
which the system is described, change
rapidly. Without a constant inflow of new
data the existing stock of factual information
becomes obsolete very soon.
What a contrast with physics, biology or
even psychology where the magnitude of
most parameters is practically constant
and where critical experiments and measurements
don't have to be repeated every
year!
Just to keep up our very modest current
capabilities we have to maintain a steady
flow of new data. A progressive expansion
of these capabilities would be out of the
question without a continuous and rapid
rise of this flow. Moreover, the new, additional
data in many instances will have to
be qualitatively different from those provided
hitherto.
To deepen the foundation of our analytical
system it will be necessary to reach
unhesitatingly beyond the limits of the
domain of economic phenomena as it has
been staked out up to now. The pursuit
of a more fundamental understanding of
the process of production inevitably leads
into the area of engineering sciences. To
penetrate below the skin-thin surface of
conventional consumption functions, it
will be necessary to develop a systematic
study of the structural characteristics and
of the functioning of households, an area in
which description and analysis of social,
anthropological and demographic factors
must obviously occupy the center of the
stage.
Establishment of systematic cooperative
relationships across the traditional
frontiers now separating economics from
these adjoining fields is hampered by the
sense of self-sufficiency resulting from what
I have already characterized as undue reliance
on indirect statistical inference as
the principal method of empirical research.
As theorists, we construct systems in which
prices, outputs, rates of saving and investment,
etc., are explained in terms of
production functions, consumption functions
and other structural relationships
whose parameters are assumed, at least for
arguments' sake, to be known. As econometricians,
engaged in what passes for
empirical research, we do not try, however,
to ascertain the actual shapes of these
functions and to measure the magnitudes
of these parameters by turning up new
factual information. We make an about
face and rely on indirect statistical inference
to derive the unknown structural
relationships from the observed magnitudes
of prices, outputs and other variables
that, in our role as theoreticians, we
treated as unknowns.
Formally, nothing is, of course, wrong
with such an apparently circular procedure.
Moreover, the model builder in
erecting his hypothetical structures is free
to take into account all possible kinds of
factual knowledge and the econometrician
in principle, at least, can introduce in the
estimating procedure any amount of what
is usually referred to as "exogenous"
information before he feeds his programmed