future is necessarily uncertain, and the
decisions made still exhibit risk aversion.
Expectations for the future are related
to quantities as well as prices. The importance
of quantity expectations has been
stressed in macroeconomic models, even in
such pre-Keynesian concepts as the acceleration
principle, and most especially in
relation to inventories. It sometimes is
held that in a neoclassical world only prices
matter; in the absence of prices, presumably
they are replaced by price expectations.
But that is not strictly true. Under
constant returns, at least, quantity information
for the individual firm is needed
even when neoclassical assumptions are
strictly fulfilled. Neoclassically founded investment
theories usually predict capitaloutput
ratios or capital-labor ratios; they
still need output forecasts explicitly or implicitly.
This gives considerable, perhaps
major weight to past quantity information
in predicting the future and therefore in
guiding current investment decisions. It is
perhaps along these lines that Keynesian
theory, with its overwhelming emphasis on
quantity changes as equilibrating variables,
can be founded firmly on individual
optimizing behavior.

I have referred to the fact that information
is dispersed throughout the economy
but have not suggested how. In the pure
neoclassical model, each agent knows only
his own production possibilities and his
tastes, together with market information
on the rest of the economy. In the world I
have just sketched, however, any variables
which improve his ability to predict the
future have a very meaningful economic
value to him. He will seek to acquire additional
information. Such information is
presumably costly; that is the basis for
such great emphasis on the value of informational
economy. But there is clearly
a great incentive to acquire information of
predictive value, and, as neoclassical
theory would predict, there will be an incentive
to produce such information. We
have then an economic information industry:
(lata assembly and analysis, business
journalism, economic forecasting, with
a longer-run perspective business education.
Since information as a commodity
does not satisfy all the neoclassical norms,
it is not surprising that the government
plays a large role in this process. Information-
acquisition activities and information
markets now appear on the economic landscape.
Efficiency in the operation of firms
ceases to be purely productive efficiency;
it involves efficiency in prediction as well.
I would conjecture that the incomplete
diffusion of information -along the lines just
sketched has a good deal to do with the
operations of the securities markets and
the decisions on corporate financing. The
predominant role of internal financing and
indeed the whole special importance of the
managerial factor in corporate decision
making are clearly connected with differential
access to information about the
firm.

You may have forgotten by now, but I
earlier promised to consider not only the
implications of but also the causes for the
absence of markets for future goods. One
might wonder why one should explain the
absence of a phenomenon. Sherlock Holmes
once maintained to the dimwitted local
police inspector so typical of English detective
stories that the significant question
in the case at hand was the dog's barking
at night. "But," said the inspector, "the
dog didn't bark." "That," said Holmes,
"is what is significant." So too is the absence
of these markets significant for a full
neoclassical theory. A truncated theory of
temporary equilibrium in which markets
for future goods are replaced by some form
of expectations, themselves functions of
current prices and quantities, has indeed
been developed, though its empirical content
is necessarily meager if the formation
of expectations is left unanalyzed. But the