able, modelled the situation neatly, and then
drew policy conclusions that could hold only
if the posited signs were valid. Yet their claims
often went beyond the assertion that "if these
facts ... then" variety.
As an example to illustrate the point, I have
deliberately chosen a good, widely cited paper,
because the paper represents good theory, but
interprets it, for policy purposes, with dubious
"stylized facts." Sudhir Anand and Vijay Joshi
(1979) considered a world, such as that envis-
aged by Hagen ( 1958), in which workers in the
advanced sector receive a higher wage than in
the rest of the economy due to unions or other
(presumably unalterable) circumstances. They
then asked whether maximizing international
value added for given employment of domestic
resources is an appropriate criterion when
income-distribution considerations cannot be sep-
arated from productive-efficiency considerations.
In their setup, the clear answer is no, because
tradeables are produced by the advanced (pre-
sumably unionized) sector, and hence maxi-
mizing international value will pull more
resources into that sector at the cost of a dete-
riorating income distribution. Interestingly,
they do not address the question of whether the
advanced sector is labor or capital intensive. If,
as is true for outer-oriented developing coun-
tries, the exportables are labor intensive relative
to import-competing activity, removing protec-
tion to induce a move of more workers to the
"advanced" high-wage sector would presum-
ably increase wages of those workers and also
those in the rest of the economy: a more equal
income distribution would be obtained at the
expense of lower real wages for all. Without
regard to factor intensity, however, Anand and
Joshi (1979 p. 350) conclude that:
The motivation behind the theory of dis-
tortions has been to criticise and to guide
trade and industrialisation policies ...
Our analysis emphasises the need for
caution ... Departures from technical ef-
ficiency may be called for as part of the
rational response by governments to the
limitations they face in carrying out de-
sirable income distribution policies ...40
Anand and Joshi ( 1979) assumed that mov-
ing toward economic efficiency in tradeables
requires paying higher wages because of a dis-
tortion. Yet, in fact, the evidence suggests that
it has been the highly protected, import-
competing industries which have been able to
pay above-average wages; removing protec-
tion has led to rapid expansion of employment
in labor-intensive industries. If the latter stylized
fact is correct, and if income-distribution consid-
erations are important, it would suggest that
the policy implications of the Anand-Joshi
analysis are the opposite of what they sug-
gest-namely, that policy makers should en-
courage, even beyond the optimum, a shift of
resources out of protected industries (presum-
ably by removing protection) and into export-
able industries.4"
III. What Research Contributed
to Improved Policies
Policies that were not consistent with policy
makers' growth objectives were cloaked in re-
spectability in the 1950's and 1960's by theory
and stylized facts of the type I have already
described. I have so far discussed properties of
some theories that made them susceptible to
misapplication or misuse.
A second question is equally important,
however. That is, how did the change in econ-
omists' policy prescriptions come about? What
led to the reversal to recognition of the im-
portance of an open economy after the con-
version to advocacy of import substitution in
the 1950's and 1960's? I can address this ques-
tion more rapidly because much of the answer
was implicit in the description of the evolution
of developing countries' trade policies.