and wanted to use the chapel for
storage.
The "lore of nicely-calculated less or
more," of course, is economics. I used to
think that high heaven rejected this because
its resources were infinite and therefore
did not need to be economized. I have
since come to regard this view as theologically
unsound for reasons which I cannot
go into lhere, but also for a more fundamental
reason. High Heaven, at least as it
exists and propagates itself in the minds
of men, is nothing if not heroic. The
power of religion in human history has
arisen more than anything from its capacity
to give identity to its practitioners and
to inspire them with behavior which arises
out of this perceived identity. In extreme
form, this gives rise to the saints and martyrs
of all faiths, religious or secular, but
it also gives rise to a great deal of quiet
heroism, for instance, in jobs, in marriage,
in child rearing and in the humdrum tasks
of daily life, without which a good deal of
the economy might well fall apart.
A good deal of the criticism of economics
from both left and right arises from
dissatisfaction with its implied neglect of
the heroic. There is a widespread feeling
that trade is somehow dirty, and that merchants
are somewhat undesirable characters,
and that especially the labor market
is utterly despicable as constituting the
application of the principle of prostitution
to virtually all areas of human life. This
sentiment is not something which economists
can neglect. We have assumed all
too easily in economics that because something
paid off it was therefore automatically
legitimate. Unfortunately, the dynamics
of legitimacy are more complex
than this. Frequently it is negative payoffs,
that is, sacrifices, rather than positive
payoffs, which establish legitimacy. It has
been the precise weakness of the institutions
that we think primarily of as economic,
that is, associated with exchange,
such as the stock market, the banking system,
organized commodity markets and so
on, as Schumpeter pointed out, that they
easily lose their legitimacy if they are not
supported by other elements and institutions
in the society which can sustain
them as integral parts of a larger community.
On the right also we find nationalists,
fascists, and the military, attacking
the economic man and economic motivation
from the point of view of the heroic
ethic. It is a wonder indeed that economic
institutions can survive at all, when economic
man is so universally unpopular.
No one in his senses would want his
daughter to marry an economic man, one
who counted every cost and asked for
every reward, was never afflicted with
mad generosity or uncalculating love, and
who never acted out of a sense of inner
identity and indeed had no inner identity
even if he was occasionally affected by
carefully calculated considerations of benevolence
or malevolence. The attack on
economics is an attack on calculatedness
and the very fact that we think of the calculating
as cold suggests how exposed
economists are to romantic and heroic
criticism.
My personal view is that, especially at
his present stage or development, man requires
both heroic and economic elements
in his institutions, in his learning processes
and in his decision-making and the
problem of maintaining them in proper
balance and tension is one of the major
problems of maturation, both of the individual
person and of societies. Economic
man is a clod, heroic man is a fool, but
somewhere between the clod and the fool,
human man, if the expression may be pardoned,
steers his tottering way.
Let me conclude by stealing another
idea from economics and applying it to
general moral science. This is the concept