In recent years and especially since the onset
of the current depression, the economics profession
and the lay public have heard a great deal
about the sharp conflict between "monetarists
and Keynesians" or between "monetarists and
fiscalists.". The difference between the two
"schools" is generally held to center on whether
the money supply or fiscal variables are the
major determinants of aggregate economic activity,
and hence the most appropriate tool of
stabilization policies.

My central theme is that this view is quite far
from the truth, and that the issues involved are of
far greater practical import. There are in reality
no serious analytical disagreements between
leading monetarists and leading nonmonetarists.
Milton Friedman was once quoted as saying,
"We are all Keynesians, now," and I am quite
prepared to reciprocate that "we are all monetarists'
'-if by morietarism is meant assigning to
the stock of money a major role in determining
output and prices. Indeed, the list of those who
have long been monetarists in this sense is quite
extensive, including among other John Maynard
Keynes as well as myself, as is attested by
my 1944 and 1963 articles.
In reality the distinguishing feature of the
monetarist school and the real issues of disagreement
with nonmonetarists is not monetarism, but
rather the role that should probably be assigned
to stabilization policies. Nonmonetarists accept
what I regard to be the fundamental practical
message of The General Theory: that a private
enterprise economy using an intangible money
needs to be stabilized, can be stabilized, and
therefore should be stabilized by appropriate
monetary and fiscal policies. Monetarists by
contrast take the view that there is no serious
need to stabilize the economy; that even if there
were a need, it could not be done, for stabilization
policies would be more likely to increase
than to decrease instability; and, at least some
monetarists would, I believe, go so far as to hold
that, even in the unlikely event that stabilization
policies could on balance prove beneficial, the
government should not be trusted with the necessary
power.

What has led me to address this controversy
is the recent spread of monetarism, both in a
simplistic, superficial form and in the form of
growing influence on the practical conduct of
economic policy, which influence, I shall argue
presently, has played at least some role in the
economic upheavals of the last three years.
In what follows then, I propose first to review
the main arguments bearing on the need for
stabilization policies, that is, on the likely extent
of instability in the absence of such policies, and
then to examine the issue of the supposed destabilizing
effect of pursuing stabilization policies.
My main concern will be with instability generated
by the traditional type of disturbances-demand
shocks. But before I am through, I will
give some consideration to the difficult problems
raised by the newer type of disturbance-supply
shocks.

I. The Keynesian Case for Stabilization Policies
A. The General Theory

Keynes' novel conclusion about the need for