THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
makes benefits a progressive function of lifetime
earnings offers insurance about lifetime
earnings that is not available in the market.
If the taxes and benefits for a cohort broke
even in present value terms, the use of a progressive
benefit formula would imply that the
labor supplies of lower earners were being subsidized
and those of higher earners were being
taxed.45 This is the familiar pattern with insurance
with asymmetric information-a combination
of insurance and incentives neither of
which satisfy the conditions for first-best optimization.
This effect of progressivity is in
addition to the effects from annuity pricing discussed
above. Some of the effects of annuitization
and progressivity would be offsettingthose
with higher earnings of each gender tend
to live longer-and some would be compounding-
women on average have lower earnings
and longer lives. That taxes and benefits do not
break even on a cohort basis is discussed in the
next section.
The progressivity in the benefit formula uses
taxes that distort labor supply in order to redistribute
income and provide insurance. The progressive
annual income tax also redistributes
income, provides insurance against earnings uncertainty,
and distorts labor supply. Since these
two institutions work on different tax bases and
provide payments at different times, there is
room for each of them to contribute despite the
presence of the other. Annual income taxation
recognizes short-term needs, coming from borrowing
constraints and from behavior that is not
time-consistent. It also recognizes capital income
as part of determining tax rates. Ex post,
all of one's Social Security taxable earnings (in
the best 35 years) contributed to benefits in a
way that varies with age but not with the level
of annual earnings, given lifetime earnings.
This avoids the distortions coming from having
different marginal tax rates in different years as
a function of annual earnings, or annual capital
income. The use of a lifetime measure also
separates out issues of lifetime earnings from
the age-earnings profile in doing redistribu-
45 This resembles an EITC being financed by a positive
income tax. Unlike the EITC, which has a region of high
marginal taxes as the subsidies are phased out, Social Se-
curity has a monotonic transition from marginal subsidies to
marginal taxes.
tion.46 While both annual income taxation and
lifetime social security have received analyses
of the trade-off among redistribution, insurance,
and distortions, there has not been much work
considering the simultaneous use of both
institutions.
A. Retirement Test
For a mandate to save for later consumption
to have bite, workers can not be allowed to
claim benefits whenever they want, including
immediately. To claim Social Security retirement
benefits, a worker must be at least 62. The
system could simply start paying benefits at age
62. Instead, between age 62 and the age for full
benefits, workers can only start receiving benefits
if their current earnings are low enough,
corresponding to full or partial retirement for
many workers.47 Any delay in the start of benefits
increases their monthly amount, tending to
counterbalance the delay in the start of benefits.
The impact of this retirement test on labor market
incentives is in addition to effects discussed
above that apply to each year of labor supply.
That is, the effect of Social Security on incentives
for continued work past age 62 has two
parts. One is the effect of a delay in the start of
benefits together with their later increase as a
consequence of the delay in their start.48 The
46 For example, if everyone had the same age-earnings
profile, Social Security would do no redistribution within a
cohort, while annual income taxes would subject each per-
son to earnings subsidies when younger and taxes when
older.
47 Benefits are paid to workers younger than the age for
full benefits if earnings are below the exempt amount, which
equals $11,640 in 2004. Earnings above this amount result
in a 50-percent reduction in benefits, until benefits reach
zero. Rules are different for the year in which the age for
full benefits is reached. After reaching the age for full
benefits, benefits may be claimed whatever the ongoing
level of earnings. A worker can receive a larger benefit by
delaying the start of benefits up to age 70.
48 The start of benefits can be delayed even if the worker
retires. For a worker without liquidity constraints, labor
supply is not encouraged by a net subsidy from delay (in the
case of a long expected life) since delay is available any-
way. But work is discouraged for those with shorter life
expectancies. While some eligible workers do not claim
benefits right away, overwhelmingly, retired workers do
claim fairly quickly. For those who would claim as soon as
they stopped working, work is encouraged by a larger
increase in benefits from delay as a result of a longer
expected life.
12
MARCH 2004