less progressive in the last two decades, while
the ratio of transfers to income has been
increasing.-3 In other words, the recent increases
in transfer payments in the United
States have been financed by the low and
middle income groups, while the rich have
been getting tax cuts.
What Role for the Income Tax?
Most people support tax progressivity on
the ground that taxes should be levied in
accordance with ability to pay, which is assumed
to rise more than proportionately with
income. Economists have long had trouble
with the "ability to pay" concept. In recent
years they have revived the old notion that
consumption measures ability to pay better
than income does. I believe that the person
in the street is right and that we should
continue to rely on the income tax to raise
revenue in an equitable manner.
Ability to Pay. In the latter half of the
nineteenth century, progressive income taxation
was justified by "sacrifice" theories that
emerged from discussions of ability to pay.
Under this doctrine, ability to pay is assumed
to increase as incomes rise, and the
objective is to impose taxes on a basis that
would involve "equal sacrifice" in some
sense. If the marginal utility of income declines
more rapidly than income increases
and the relation between income and utility
is the same for all taxpayers, equal sacrifice
leads to progression."4 Whether or not one
believes in sacrifice theory, the ability to pay
idea has been a powerful force in history and
has doubtedly contributed to the widespread
acceptance of progressive taxation.15 Young
has found that the equal sacrifice model fits
most U.S. tax schedules in the postwar period,
with the notable exception of the
schedule adopted in 1986. Similar results
hold for Italy, West Germany, and Japan.16
Henry Simons vigorously attacked sacrifice
theory although he argued strongly that
the purpose of the progressive income tax is
to reduce economic inequality.17 Simons was
vague on how far progression should be
pushed, but he clearly felt that it had not yet
gone too far in most countries. His prescription
was the pragmatic one that the tax rates
should not impair economic incentives. In
his policy statements, he argued in favor of a
broad base and graduated rate schedule that
rises to a maximum of 50 percent.18
I agree with Simons that the income tax
should be used to reduce the great disparities
of welfare, opportunity, and economic power
arising from the unequal distribution of income.
I also recognize that this view is not
widely held and has probably not been the
major rationale for income tax legislation in
the United States or in most other countries.
The income tax is widely used primarily
because it raises large amounts of revenue in
a moderately progressive way. Recent income
tax reforms have concentrated mainly
on eliminating tax preferences to improve
13Little empirical work has been done on trends in  the progressivity of the transfer system itself. If it has
changed, the movement in the last decade may have
been toward less progressivity because welfare payments
have not kept up with inflation and the coverage
of the unemployment compensation system has nar-  rowed.
14To be precise, equal absolute sacrifice leads to
progression, equal proportionate sacrifice to still more
progression, and equal marginal sacrifice to leveling of
incomes from the top down until the required revenues
are obtained. See Richard Musgrave (1959), pp. 99-102.  15See Musgrave (1959), ch. 5 and Richard Goode
(1976), ch. 2. For a skeptical view of the case for the
progressive income tax, see Blum and Kalven (1952).
16See H. P. Young (1990). I omit discussion of the
optimal tax literature, which built on the old sacrifice
theory, because it does not yet provide a basis for
making judgments about the optimum degree of progression.
This literature suggests that a progressive income
tax is appropriate when redistribution is an objective
of social policy, but the range of tax rates is very
wide depending on the assumptions used. See Glen
Hubbard and Kenneth Judd (1986), Nicholas Stern
(1987), pp. 49-52, Henry Aaron (1989), pp. 10-12,
Rosen (1988) and Slemrod (forthcoming).  17, The case for drastic progression in taxation must
be rested on the case against inequality-on the ethical  or aesthetic judgment that the prevailing distribution of
wealth and income reveals a degree (and/or kind) of
inequality which is distinctly evil or unlovely." Simons
(1938), pp. 18-19.  18See Simons (1950).