and by "controlled" social experimentation
(for example, by the Brookings
Institution and the University of Wisconsin
Institute for Research on Poverty).
These newer tools and the institutions
that nurture them constitute part of the
rich and expanding resources of economics.


Economics can also draw on a broad
data base, especially in federal statistics.
But here, the quantity, timeliness, and
even the quality of the data are not keeping
pace with either the problems requiring
analysis or the capacity of our quantitative
techniques. Responding to policy
needs and mounting self-criticism, the
profession has opened many new fronts in
the search for realistic micro-data to link
up with macro-data, for cross-section data
to help overcome the curse of collinearity
in time-series analysis, and for custombuilt
data developed by survey and experimental
techniques.

That the human, analytical, and quantitative
resources of economics provide a
huge potential for solving problems seems
undeniable. That more of these powerful
resources than ever before are being put at
the disposal of economic policy makers
also seems undeniable. What we do not
know is what proportion is being misdirected
into arid puzzles, sterile proofs,
and recreational mathematics while the
world's pressing economic and social problems
go begging for answers. Here, we
can only match one observer's impression
against another's. The profession itself has
not come to grips with this question of
allocative efficiency.

A second test in appraising the state of
economics, one not unknown to economics,
is that of the market place. This takes
several forms, none very robust, but none
trivial. The first is the upsurge in enrollments
in economics courses, especially in
introductory economics, that has occurred
in the academic years 1973-74 and 1974-
75. The second is the oft-reported high
ranking of economists' salaries in business,
government, and academic life. A third
is the strong and growing demand for
economists' inputs into the policy-making
process either as staff members or as
expert witnesses for congressional committees,
individual congressmen, and the
executive branch.

With students, business, and government
beating a path to our door, we can
infer that something must be right with
economics, or wrong with the economy,
or both. Either we are building a better
mousetrap or there are more and bigger
mice threatening our customers. Perhaps
it is simply that we have the only mousetraps
in town.

But there must be more to it than that.
Take the policy maker, for example.
What he finds congenial is that he can
hand an economist a problem relating to
changes in taxation, regulations, budget
proposals, pollution control, poverty, social
security, public service jobs, gasoline
taxes, oil prices, and so on and be reasonably
sure of getting a useful appraisal of
alternative paths to his objectives, of
costs and benefits, and of distributional,
allocative, and stabilization impacts.
Many of these judgments will come with
orders of magnitude or reasonably precise
numbers attached. He may not trust our
GNP forecasts, but he has come to respect
our hardheaded analysis and numbers on
the myriad problems of economic choice
with which he is faced.

It seems fair to draw another inference:
notwithstanding the current wave of selfcriticism
and public criticism, even lampooning,
of economists and despite our
highly visible public debates and highly
vulnerable participation in policy making,
economics continues to maintain its standing
as a science. Signs of a reported crisis
of public confidence or of a "recession of
self-confidence" are few and far between.