was written almost entirely in terms
of the real wage. The general macro-theoretic
framework, in which the discussion of
the labor market is embedded, clearly has
an eye on Keynes. The underlying model
could be IS-LM without doing much violence
to the argument. There are little
anachronisms: Pigou tends to think of the
interest rate as being determined in the
goods market (by Savings = Investment) and
nominal income as being determined by
the demand for money. Today we take
simultaneity seriously, but the General Theory
more or less speaks as if real output is
determined in the goods market and the
interest rate by liquidity preference. After
what is to me a confusing description
of a Keynesian low-level liquidity-trap
equilibrium, Pigou invokes the Pigou effect
to explain why the low level might not be as
low as all that and then, characteristically,
remarks that none of it is very important in
practice anyway. All this is relevant here
only as background for the treatment of the
labor market.
Pigou says the obvious thing first, and I
agree that it is the first thing to say: if there
is "thorough-going competition" among
workers, then the only possible equilibrium
position is at full employment. That is little
more than a definition of equilibrium. He is
aware that he is taking a lot of dynamics for
granted. Expectations of falling wages could
perversely reduce the demand for labor; and
he discusses the possibility that under some
conditions, with the interest rate at its practical
floor, nominal wage rates and prices
may chase each other down and thus prevent
the real-wage adjustment needed for an
increase in employment. (This is where the
Pigou effect makes its appearance, of
course.)
It is what comes next that interests me. It
is obvious to Pigou, writing in 1944, that the
labor market does not behave as if workers
were engaged in thorough-going competition
for jobs. With the common sense that
seems somehow to have escaped his modem
day successors, he wonders why it does not.
And he discusses three or four of the institutional
factors that a reasonable person
would mention even now as obstacles to the
classical functioning of the labor market.
First of all, he realizes that the labor
market is segmented. Not everyone in it is
in competition with everyone else. I am not
referring here to the obvious fact that abilities,
experience, and skills differ, so that
unemployed laborers can not compete for
the jobs held by craftsmen. That fact of life
merely reminds us that "labor" is not a
well-defined homogeneous factor of production.
Even within skill categories or occupational
groups, however, workers have ties to
localities, to industries, to special job classifications,
even to individual employers.
These ties can be broken, but not easily. It
is interesting to me that even the Theory of
Unemployment of 1933 devotes a lot of space
to the analysis of a labor market in
which there are many "centers of employment"
-to use the neutral term chosen
by Pigou to describe segmentation of the
labor market-between which mobility is
absent or slow. Of course he observes that
even in a completely segmented labor
market, if there is thorough-going competition
within segments, full employment will
be the rule, although there may be wage
differentials between centers of employment
for otherwise identical workers. I think that
the fact of segmentation is very important,
not only because it limits the scope of competition
but because its pervasiveness suggests-
though it can not prove-that habit
and custom play a large role in labor market
behavior. From the prominence that he
gives it, I gather that Pigou might have
agreed.
A second factor, which has been more
often discussed, is trade unionism. Pigou
does not have very much to say about collective
bargaining, but what he says makes
sense.
Of course, these agencies in their decisions
have regard to the general state
of the demand for labour; they will
have no wish to set wage rates so high
that half the people of the country are
thrown out of work. Nevertheless,
there is reason to believe that they do
not have regard to demand conditions
in such degree as would be necessary
to secure, as thorough-going competition
would do, the establishment of
full employment. [ 1945, p. 26]