TABLE 2-ESTIMATED FEEDBACK FROM
CURTAILED GROWTH OF ENERGY USE TO GNP,
1975-2010, UNITED STATES
Reduction out of
the Base Case in
Discounteda
Price
Energy Sum of Elasticity
Use in GNP of Demand
Policies 2010 1975-2010 for Energy
(1) Bounds on
Specific Up to 20% 1 to 2% -.25
Tech- or -.4
nologies
(2) Zero
Energy 600 { to 2% -.5
Growth ' up to 30% -.25
through
Conservation
Tax
Source: MRG report, Tables 111.22 and 111.23.
aDiscount Rate: 6 percent per annum.
-.25. I shall come back.later to the estimation
of the elasticity parameters found to
have been very important.
111. Interdisciplinary Differences in Outlook
We have now assembled enough reference
material for us to make a start with our
main topic-the way in which differences in
outlook between the disciplines affect the
conduct and evaluation of joint studies.
The most significant difference between
economics and the natural sciences lies in
the opportunities for testing and verification
of hypotheses. Jacob Marschak used to say
that economists carry the combined burdens
of meteorologists and engineers. Like
the meteorologists, they are expected to predict
the future course of important variables
in their field of study. Just as engineers
design more and more efficient
machines, economists are also expected to
improve the design of society where it affects
good use of resources. But, like the
meteorologist, the economist has traditionally
been confined to drawing inferences
from passive observations, records of data
generated by the turbulence of the atmosphere
or the fluctuations and trends of
economic life. Finally-a very important
difference-meteorologists and engineers
have all the laws and measurements established
by physics and chemistry available
to them, fully documented by experimental
tests and results.
Traditionally, economists have not
searched for similar inputs from experimental
or observational research of a
psychological or sociological nature. In the
1950's and early 1960's they have engaged
in some experimentation of their own on behavior
under uncertainty and in bargaining
and gaming situations. However, the findings
of this work have not been put to use
as premises for modeling an entire economy.
For that purpose, over a few articulate protests,
many economists have been satisfied
to postulate simple rules of behavior by
consumers and business firms. The terms
"introspection" and "casual empiricism"
have been used to describe the cognitive
sources of these premises. In the version of
the currently dominant "neoclassical"
school of thought, these premises express
optimizing responses of demand and supply
to a uniform price system: satisfaction
maximizing by consumers, profit maximizing
by firms.
These premises have a certain intuitive
plausibility about them. Undoubtedly, their
widespread adoption has also been aided by
the richness of the body of inferences one
can draw from them. In fact, the premises
form the logical foundation for the paradigm
of neoclassical economics: the concept of an
equilibrium of prices and quantities that in
some way ties together the economic decisions
taken by all seemingly independent
agents. Conceptually the prices and the
quantity responses may describe a stationary
state over an extended period of
time. More realistically, they may be dated
variables and thus also link decisions that
vary over successive periods, to sustain a
moving intertemporal equilibrium.
Parenthetically, use of the term equilibrium
does not imply an assumption that