move to significant real deficit until well into
1982. Should any theorist-or policymaker
-have been surprised that the economy evi-
denced mounting unemployment leading up
to the mini-recession of 1980? Or should
they have been surprised that, with the addi-
tion of very restrictive monetary policy, im-
posed as " the only game in town" to combat
inflation given the supposed fiscal stimulus,
this led on to the deep recession of 1982?
Had appropriate measures been used to
illuminate previous policy, we might have
been better prepared to see the predictable
consequences of the very large real deficits
inaugurated in the latter half of 1982. We
might then have been all the more incredu-
lous of those who perceived a recovery from
the trough of a "real business cycle." 25 Who
indeed can really believe that the 12 million
new jobs, about which some have boasted,
were those of otherwise idle workers lured
by higher real wages-brought on, shall we
say, by lower oil prices or higher marginal
products stemming from sweeping new pro-
ductivity gains? Rather, it should have been
clear-dare I say "perfectly clear"?-that it
was the old-fashioned Keynesian stimulus of
real budget deficits that has contributed
mightily to cutting unemployment in half,
from its recession high of almost 11 percent.
There should indeed be some consterna-
tion among those who find the current 5.3
percent unemployment as much as a full
percentage point below their misnamed
"natural" rate. Where, I might add, is that
supposedly excess-demand "accelerating in-
flation" we were taught to fear? Perhaps
waiting to be confused again with the supply
shocks of a new war or oil cartel in the
Middle East!
IV. Provision for the Future: The Case
of Social Security
There is a perennial, legitimate concern in
any nation, and certainly in our mixed econ-
omy, as to the allocation of resources to the
joys of today and the needs of tomorrow. It
is widely argued, however much, as I have
suggested, on the basis of improper mea-
sures, that our presumed budget and trade
deficits will tarnish our golden years or con-
tribute undue and possibly unsustainable
burdens to our children and grandchildren.
Flowing from this argument have been a
number of proposals of new accounting for
our vast Social Security system. However
well-intentioned, they threaten to make our
fiscal mess all the worse.
There have, on the one hand, been sugges-
tions that we bring our huge "contingent
liabilities" into the general federal account-
ing framework. We would, for example, in-
clude the present value of expected payouts
to future retirees, net of their expected "con-
tributions" or tax payments, as federal debt.
Increases in this net debt would then add to
our measure of the deficit; decreases would
reduce it. At first glance, this would seem
sound. The budget would be truly "unified."
But would debt and deficits so measured
really match our theoretical constructs? Can
we expect agents to react in the same fashion
to uncertain and currently illiquid potential
receipts decades in the future as they would
to liquid current cash or Treasury bills? Must
we not recognize that few have any idea
what their Social Security benefits will be, or
what taxes they can expect to pay before
they receive them, whatever is written into
present, and very changeable legislation? Are
Martin Feldstein's changing estimates of net
Social Security wealth (1974, 1982) robust
arguments of anybody's consumption func-
tion? 26
In principle, contingent and uncertain lia-
bilities and assets should be taken into ac-
count in macroeconomic analysis. My objec-
tion to confusing them with the already
mis-measured components of the current
budget should not be taken to deny this. The
move in the opposite direction, though, to
declare Social Security trust funds "off bud-
get" and then ignore them in determining
appropriate fiscal policy is treacherous. Some
advise us now, for example, that a "bal-
anced" overall budget, despite the infirmities
I have pointed out in that measure, is not