or more firms can produce the industry's
intertemporal output vector as cheaply as he.
I will prove now under a set of remarkably
unrestrictive assumptions that despite its cost
advantages, there exists no intertemporal
price vector consistent with equilibrium for
this firm. That is, whatever his price vector,
his market will at some time be vulnerable to
partial or complete takeover by an entrant
who has neither superior skills nor technological
superiority and whose entrance
increases the quantities of resources used up
in production. In other words, here the
invisible hand proves incapable of protecting
the most efficient producing arrangement and
leaves the incumbent producer vulnerable to
displacement by an aggressive entrant. I leave
to your imaginations what, if anything, this
says about the successive displacements
on the world market of the Dutch by the
English, the English by the Germans and the
Americans, and the Americans, perhaps, by
the Japanese.
The proof of our proposition on the intertemporal
vulnerability of incumbents to entry
that is premature from the viewpoint of
cost minimization does require just a little
bit of algebra. To keep our analysis simple, I
will divide time into two periods, each lasting
z =45 years so that capacity in the first
period is, optimally, just sufficient to satisfy
all demand, but in the second, it requires the
construction of added capacity to meet demand
growth because, by assumption, anticipatory
construction to meet growth more
than z years in the future simply is too
costly. Also for simplicity, I will assume that
there are no costs other than cost of construction.
Of course, neither this nor the use
of only two periods really affects the argument
in any way. My only three substantive
assumptions are that demand is growing with
time, that there are economies of scale, that
is, declining average costs in construction,
and that there exists some length of time, z,
so great that it does not pay in the initial
construction to build capacity sufficient for
the growth in quantity demanded that will
occur beyond that date.
The argument, like the notation, is now
straightforward. Let y, be output in period t,
P, be price in period t, and K(y) be the cost
of construction of capacity sufficient to produce
(a maximum of) y units per period.
Here, both p, and K(y) are expressed in
discounted present value.4
Then, by assumption, our firm will construct
at the beginning of the first period
capacity just sufficient to produce output y,
at cost K(y,) and at the beginning of the
second period it will produce the rest of the
capacity it needs, Y2- yI >0, at the cost
K(y2 - y ).
The first requirement for the prices in
question to be consistent with equilibrium is
that they permit the incumbent to cover his
costs, that is, that
(1) PIYI+P2Y2 2 K(y1)+K(y2-y1).
Second, for these prices to constitute an
equilibrium they must protect the incumbent
against any and all possible incursions by
entrants. That is, suppose an entrant were to
consider the possibility of constructing
capacity y, and not expanding in the future,
and, by undercutting the incumbent, selling
the same output, y,, in each period. Entry on
these terms will in fact be profitable unless
the prices are such that the sale of y, in each
period does not bring in revenues sufficient
to cover the cost, K(y,), of the entrant's
once-and-for-all construction. That is, entry
will be profitable unless
(2) plyl + P2Y1 - K(y1).
Thus, the prices in question cannot constitute
an equilibrium unless (2) as well as (1)
are satisfied.
Now, subtracting (2) from (1) we obtain
immediately
P2(Y2-y) K(y2- yi)
or
(3) p2 > K(Y2-Y1Y)/(AY2-Yj),