tained, the present value of a standard bundle
of goods in the future decreases as that
future time recedes. Hence the present value
of future life relative to that of future goods
will be much higher than the value of present
life in relation to present goods. It should
not be inferred from this that future decision
makers are assumed or advised to devote
greater resources to safety and health
than the present decision makers, although
the future ones may well want to do this for
reasons of their own. The inference is rather,
I submit, that the present values I have described
reflect a curious mixture of three
ingredients: one intertemporal ethical rule,
present preferences between consumption
and protection, and an assumption about
savings behavior of all generations within
the next fifty years, say. Under these assumptions,
sets of "present values" formed
at successive points in time need not, and
generally will not, be consistent with each
other.
VI. The Empirical Basis of
Quantitative Economics
I now go on to a discussion of the empirical
basis for some of the quantitative
statements that economics contributes to
interdisciplinary studies. I will again illustrate
this question with reference to the
few studies I have chosen as examples. At
the same time I will emphasize the role that
the premises underlying the concept of
equilibrium play in this process.
The premise of profit maximization implies
a subpremise of cost minimization.
I regard that subpremise as fitting reality
more closely than the entire premise. It
underlies the supply side of the MRG study
of future energy technology mixes I have
described.
The premise of maximization of satisfaction
by the consumer can be made more
plausible and more applicable by a further
specification. Applied to energy, it says that
successive equal additions to a consumer's
annual energy end-use budget are worth
less and less to him. Operationally, how
much each successive addition is worth to
him can be measured, for instance, by that
increase in the expenditure for the rest of
his consumption that he would have regarded
as equivalent to each next addition
to his energy consumption.
This specification implies the existence of
a household demand function for energy, in
which per capita demand for energy decreases
as its price increases, and increases
as per capita real income increases. The
MRG extended this concept to the sum of
direct and indirect demand for energy, the
latter being the energy used as input to the
production of all nonenergy goods, including
capital goods as well. Another extension
distinguishes demand for individual
fuels, where the demand for one fuel increases
if the price of another competing
fuel goes up.
These functions are then estimated from
empirical data. In the procedure followed
in the model with the estimated long-run
price elasticity of -.4 mentioned above, a
parametric form of these functions was
fitted to cross-section and time-series data
for seven OECD countries, including the
United States, for the period 1955-72. In
the model with price elasticity -.25 the
estimation procedure was not stated with
comparable explicitness. In both models the
estimated long-run demand functions,
written with price as a function of quantity,
were then integrated to estimate the benefit
from the consumption of energy in all
forms.
By comparison, the empirical basis for
the production side is more direct. Each of
the various competing energy producing,
converting, and using processes is represented
by constant ratios of inputs to outputs,
reflecting operating experience where
available, or based on estimates of such
ratios and of future availability dates for
processes not yet developed. For instance,
process estimates for the years 1985 and
2000 were drawn upon in estimating the
elasticity of substitution between electric
and nonelectric energy in the second of the
two models just discussed. This did constrain
but not by itself imply numerical
estimates of the elasticities of demand for