veal more physiological plasticity than was
previously suspected. The capacity for selfimprovement
continues into old age and appropriately
designed programs can return
diminished individuals to earlier levels of
functioning (Rowe and Kahn, 1997; cf.,
Wachter and Finch, 1997).
Peer tutoring has a two-way effect, since
it is beneficial both to the learner and to the
tutor. Both gain from involvement in social
networks that enhance mood, combat depression,
and reduce the risk of suicide. For
widowed men, the benefits are physiological
as well as psychological. Men in situations
that provide higher social support have significantly
lower losses of cortisol, epinephrine,
and norepinephrine (hormones that
reduce pain, stimulate the functioning of the
heart, and improve electrical transmission
across cells). Statistical analysis indicates a
positive relationship for both men and
women between social support and physical
performance. For the tutors, being active in
such productive and emotionally rewarding
activities serves to retain a sense of relative
youthfulness. Thus volwork, because it is effective,
because it is emotionally rewarding,
and because it is what the tutors want to do,
adds significantly to national product.
Use of fiscal policy to correct the maldistribution
of income is based, explicitly or
implicitly, on the ethical proposition that
those households at the top of the income
distribution have more income than they
ought to have. What about the case of spiritual
redistributions? Are spiritual resources
maldistributed because virtue is too heavily
concentrated? Government cannot legislate
the transfer of virtue as it does with money
income. Even if they desired to do so, those
rich in virtue or in the family ethic, or in
benevolence, could not transfer spiritual resources
by writing out checks denominated
in virtue, benevolence, or family solidarity.
Those poor in these spiritual resources acquire
more of them only through the process
of self-realization, through a concerted effort
to develop as fully as possible the virtuous
aspects of their nature.
Those rich in spiritual resources can help
those who are spiritually deprived by counseling
them, by providing spiritual companionship
and moral support, by informing and
teaching those who are deprived about existing
opportunities and procedures, and by helping
to raise their self-esteem. But this process of
correcting the maldistribution of spiritual resources
not only leaves those who are deprived
better off, it also increases the spiritual resources
of those who have virtue in abundance.
In contrast to income redistribution,
spiritual redistribution is not a fixed-sum game
in which some people can become better off
only if other people are made worse off. It is
a game in which total resources increase and
the share of the deprived in this larger total
may also increase without in any way diminishing
those who have a superabundance of
spiritual resources.
Some economists may be astonished by my
claim that in some respects the discipline has
fallen seriously behind the economy. After all,
if it were so, who would know about it before
them? The answer lies in the subtext of this
address. To understand where the economy is
and how it is evolving one needs to study not
only the present but the past. In the 1940's,
Kuznets ( 1941 ), musing about some of the analytical
mistakes made in the aftermath of the
Great Depression said: "A broader historical
background might have prevented some economists
from ignoring the dependence of their
generalizations upon transient historical conditions.
"' That advice is as good today as it
was a half century ago.