VII. Liberties, Rights, and Preferences
The need to integrate procedural consid-
erations in consequential analysis is espe-
cially important in the field of rights and
liberties. The violation or fulfillment of ba-
sic liberties or rights tends to be ignored in
traditional utilitarian welfare economics not
just because of its consequentialist focus,
but particularly because of its "welfarism,"
whereby consequent states of affairs are
judged exclusively by the utilities generated
in the respective states.37 While processes
may end up getting some indirect attention
insofar as they influence people's utilities,
nevertheless no direct and basic importance
is attached in the utililtarian framework to
rights and liberties in the evaluation of states
of affairs.
The initial formulation of social choice
did not depart in this respect from the utili-
tarian heritage, but it is possible to change
this within a broadly Arrovian framework
(see Sen, 1970, 1982a), and a good deal of
work has been done in later social choice
theory to accommodate the basic relevance
of rights and liberties in assessing states of
affairs, and thus to evaluate economic, polit-
ical, and social arrangements. If a person is
prevented from doing some preferred thing
even though that choice is sensibly seen to
be in her "personal domain," then the state
of affairs can be seen to have been wors-
ened by this failure. The extent of worsen-
ing is not to be judged only by the magni-
tude of the utility loss resulting from this (to
be compared with utility gains of others, if
any), since something more is also at stake.
As John Stuart Mill (1859 p. 140) noted,
"there is no parity between the feeling of a
person for his own opinion, and the feeling
of another who is offended at his holding
it."38 The need to guarantee some "minimal
liberties" on a priority basis can be incorpo-
rated in social choice formulations.
It turns out, however, that such uncondi-
tional priority being given even to minimal
liberty can conflict with other principles of
social choice, including the redoubtable
Pareto principle. The "impossibility of the
Paretian liberal" captures the conflict be-
tween (i) the special importance of a per-
son's preferences over her own personal
sphere, and (ii) the general importance of
people's preferences over any choice, irre-
spective of field. This impossibility theorem
has led to a large literature extending, ex-
plaining, disputing, and ameliorating the re-
sult.39 The "ways out" that have been sought
have varied between (i) weakening the pri-
ority of liberties (thereby qualifying the min-
imal liberty condition), (ii) constraining the
field-independent general force of prefer-
ences (thereby qualifying the Pareto princi-
ple), and (iii) restricting the domain of per-
missible individual-preference profiles. As
in the case of the Arrow impossibility prob-
lem, the different ways of resolving this con-
flict have variable relevance depending on
the exact nature of the social choice exer-
cise involved.
There have also been attempts to rede-
fine liberty in purely procedural terms. The
last is an important subject on its own (quite
independently of any use it might have
as an attempt to resolve the impossibility),
and I shall presently consider it. But as has