efficiency reasons to prefer the expenditure
tax and these need to be addressed. S
A basic difference between the income and
expenditure taxes is in the time perspective
of the two taxes. The perspective of the
income tax is relatively short run-a year or
several years to allow for short-run income
fluctuations. Consumption is more stable
than income and is alleged, therefore, to be a
better measure of long-term well-being. In
fact, under certain simplifying assumptions,
the bases of taxes on the discounted present
value of income and expenditure are the
same over a lifetime. Assuming perfect capital
markets, constant discount rates that apply
equally to all people under all circumstances,
tax rates that are constant and
proportional, and no gifts and bequests, the
present values of lifetime expenditures of
people with the same (discounted) lifetime
incomes are the same regardless of when the
incomes are consumed.26
Advocates of the expenditure tax regard
the lifetime perspective as a major advastage
because it permits them to pretend that taxing
consumption is equivalent to taxing personal
endowments. A tax on endowments, if
they could be measured, would avoid the
distortionary effects of either an income tax
or an expenditure tax. If it is assumed that
lifetime consumption approximates exidowment,
then taxing consumption at flAtXand
constant rates treats equally all taxpayers
with the same endowment.27 The totaly' unrealistic
assumptions underlying this line of
reasoning strain credulity, but it doestteem
to lie behind the strong support for thQ expenditure
tax by many economists.
The lifetime perspective has little merit
even without the endowment rationale. In
my view, it is difficult enough to measure
economic circumstances over relatively short
periods. Taxation of lifetime consumption
(or income) hardly seems appropriate in a
world of changing tax rates, substantial family
instability, economic and political change,
and uncertainty. Except for the attractiveness
of the arithmetic, lifetime economic
circumstances as measured by discounted
lifetime incomes or consumption cannot be
regarded as satisfactory indexes of ability to
pay.28 Moreover, taxation of annual consumption
expenditures at graduated rates
would destroy the identity of lifetime taxes
of taxpayers with the same (discounted) lifetime
incomes.
The expenditure tax is alleged to be superior
to the income tax on the additional
ground that the income tax reduces the return
on saving and therefore encourages current
as against future consumption. Even if
saving remained unchanged, the distortion
generates a welfare loss for consumers. It has
been pointed out by many economists that
this effect must be balanced against the welfare
cost of further distorting the choice
between labor and leisure. There is no theoretical
basis for judging whether the welfare
gain from eliminating the intertemporal distortion
of consumption would exceed the
welfare loss from increasing the intratemporal
distortion of the labor-leisure choice.29
A tax that omits saving from the tax base
can be shown to be the same as a tax applying
only to labor income and exempting all
property income.30 Several expenditure tax
25For analyses of the relative merits of the iitiome
and expenditure taxes, see Kaldor (1955), Misgave
(1976), Pechman (1980), Aaron and Galper (194$)jnd
Bradford (1986).
26The identity of lifetime incomes and expenditures
holds when there are gifts to others and beu ts,
provided the gifts and bequests are counted as denditures.
Aaron and Galper (1985) defined such a taks a
"lifetime" income tax, arguing that "there is nrdigical
reason why a particular astronomical regularitp31iAild
be enshrined in the tax law" (pp. 21-22). 9)
27
27See Bradford (1980), pp. 106-9, Bradford (1986 p.
315, and Musgrave (1976), pp. 11-12. Bradfordhi8lds
this view while Musgrave does not.
28For an excellent discussion of the lifetime vs. the
short-run perspective as a basis for taxation, see Goode
(1980).
29See, for example, Feldstein (1978), Atkinson and
Sandmo (1980), Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), Auerbach
and Kotlikoff (1987), ch. 5, Rosen (1988), p. 469, and
Gravelle (1988 and 1989).
30Like the equality between a consumption and an
income tax in present value terms, this assumes that tax
and interest rates remain constant over a lifetime and
there are no gifts and bequests. Let s = saving, w =
wages, c = consumption, r = the interest rate, and assume
that saving in the first period is consumed during