A second relevant change has been in the
technology of financial administration made
possible by the introduction of computers.
When Social Security was created, President
Roosevelt wanted it to be a funded system
rather than a pay-as-you-go system.14 There
was of course no way to have individually con-
trolled personal retirement accounts and the Re-
publicans in Congress did not want to trust the
government to manage a large pool of funds.
And since the Congressional Democrats were
eager to start paying benefits, the result was a de
facto shift to a pay-as-you-go structure. The
creation of individual investment accounts for
every adult, which would have been technically
impossible in the 1930s, is no longer even dif-
ficult. Today more than 90 million Americans
own mutual funds, including IRAs and 401(k)
plan accounts. In contrast to the formidable task
in the 1930s of keeping track of everyone's
Social Security account without the help of
computers, the creation of a system of individ-
ual investment-based accounts would now be
relatively easy.
The third important change has been in the
economic profession's understanding of how
fiscal incentives affect individual behavior. In
the 1930s, economists assumed that individuals
were so unresponsive to taxes and benefits that
any behavioral response could simply be ig-
nored. Most economists continued to ignore the
adverse incentive effects even when the top
marginal tax rate was over 90 percent, as it was
from 1944 to 1963. The adverse effects of high
unemployment insurance benefits on job search
and on the choice of jobs were also ignored.
Today economists recognize that high mar-
ginal rates of income tax and the marginal tax
rates implicit in various benefit rules reduce
taxable income and create substantial dead-
weight losses.
These three changes imply that if Social Se-
curity and unemployment insurance were being
created now, the programs would likely be sig-
nificantly different from those in current law.
Economists today would regard the adverse ef-
fect of Social Security on saving and capital
accumulation as a deterrent to growth rather  than as a favorable source of Keynesian de-
mand. The widespread ownership of mutual
funds, IRAs, and 401(k)s would be a natural
starting point for any new social insurance pro-
gram. And every aspect of behavior would be
assumed to be more responsive to tax rates and
program design.
More generally, the reforms that will be en-
acted in the future will inevitably evolve as
economists learn more and as the set of feasible
options changes. An interesting example of this
changing perception of what is feasible is the
possible transition to personal retirement ac-
counts in an investment-based Social Security
program. About 20 years ago, when I served as
chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
in the Reagan administration, the Social Secu-
rity retirement program was on the verge of a
crisis. The trust fund was about to reach zero
and the projected taxes to be collected over the
next few years were not large enough to pay the
benefits specified in law. President Reagan ap-
pointed a bipartisan commission to find a solution.
The resulting plan called for an acceleration of
scheduled future tax increases, the taxation of
Social Security benefits, and a variety of other
smaller measures.
President Reagan was unhappy with these
proposals and asked a small group of us in the
Administration whether there wasn't some-
thing better to be done, perhaps along the
lines of the Chilean reform that used in-
vestment-based personal retirement accounts
instead of a pay-as-you-go system. None of us
could design a feasible transition to such a
plan. It looked to me and to the others as if
accumulating funds to finance such per-
sonal retirement account annuities would in-
volve a double burden on the transition gen-
eration that was both unfair and politically
infeasible.
I now know that that was wrong. Research
that Andrew Samwick and I have done in recent
years (Feldstein and Samwick, 1998a, 1998b,
2002) shows that it would be possible to tran-
sition gradually to a completely investment-based
plan without ever increasing the combination of
pay-as-you-go taxes and personal retirement ac-
count (PRA) saving by more than 2 percent of
payroll earnings, or about 1 percent of GDP, and
without reducing the benefit that retirees receive
from the combination of the traditional tax-
financed program and the new investment-based