sharp discontinuities here, and that while the
industry structures which emerge in reality
are not always those which minimize costs,
they will constitute reasonable approximations
to the efficient structures. If this is not
so it is difficult to account for the similarities
in the patterns of industry structure that one
observes in different countries. Why else do
we not see agriculture organized as an
oligopoly in any free market economy, or
automobiles produced by 10,000 firms?
Market pressures must surely make any very
inefficient market structure vulnerable to entry,
to displacement of incumbents by foreign
competition, or to undermining in other
ways. If that is so, the market structure that
is called for by contestability theory may not
prove to be too bad an approximation to
what we encounter in reality.
II. On Oligopoly Equilibrium
I should like now to examine oligopoly
equilibrium somewhat more extensively. We
have seen that, except where a multiproduct
oligopoly firm happens to sell some of its
products in markets in which it has no competitors,
an important partial monopoly case
which I will ignore in what follows, all prices
must equal the corresponding marginal costs
in long-run equilibrium. But in an oligopoly
market, this is a troublesome concept. Unless
the industry output vector happens to fall at
a point where the cost function is characterized
by locally constant returns to scale,
we know that zero profits are incompatible
with marginal cost pricing. Particularly if
there are scale economies at that point, so
that marginal cost pricing precludes financial
viability, we can hardly expect such a solution
to constitute an equilibrium. Besides, we
have seen that long-run equilibrium requires
profit to be precisely zero. We would thus
appear to have run into a major snag by
concluding that perfect contestability always
leads to marginal cost pricing under oligopoly.


This is particularly so if the (ray) average
curve is U shaped, with its minimum occurring
at a single point, y n. For in this case
that minimum point is the only output of the
firm consistent with constant returns to scale
and with zero profits under marginal cost
pricing. Thus, dealing with the single product
case to make the point, it would appear, say,
that if the A C-minimizing output is 1,000, in
a contestable market, equilibrium is possible
if quantity demanded from the industry happens
to be exactly 2,000 units (so two firms
can produce 1,000 units each) or exactly
3,000 units or exactly 4,000 units, etc. But
suppose the demand curve happens to intersect
the industry AC curve, say, at 4,030
units. That is, then, the only industry output
satisfying the equilibrium requirement that
price equals zero profit. But then, at least
one of the four or five firms in the industry
must produce either more or less than 1,000
units of output, and so the slope of its AC
curve will not be zero at that point, precluding
either MC pricing or zero profits and,
consequently, violating one or the other of
the requirements of equilibrium in a perfectly
contestable market.

It would appear that equilibrium will be
impossible in this perfectly contestable
market unless by a great piece of luck the
industry demand curve happens to intersect
its AC curve at 2,000 or 3,000 units or some
other integer multiple of 1,000 units of output.


There are a variety of ways in which one
can grapple with this difficulty. In his dissertation
at New York University, Thijs ten
Raa has explored the issue with some care
and has shown that the presence of entry
costs of sufficient magnitude, that is, irreversible
costs which must be borne by an
entrant but not by an incumbent, can
eliminate the existence problem. The minimum
size of the entry cost required to permit
an equilibrium will depend on the size of the
deviation from zero profits under marginal
cost pricing and ten Raa has given us rules
for its determination. He has shown also that
the existence problem, as measured by the
required minimum size of entry cost,
decreases rapidly as the equilibrium number
of firms of the industry increases, typically
attaining negligible proportions as that number
reaches, say, ten enterprises. For, as is
well known, when the firm's average cost
curve is U shaped the industry's average cost
curve will approach a horizontal line as the