reflected in securities' prices, that agglomeration
has always been good for growth
but often bad for earnings.
There remains in the modern economyand
this I stress a world of small firms
where the instruction of the market is still
paramount, where costs are given, where
the state is remote and subject through the
legislature to the traditional pressures of
economic interest groups and where profit
maximization alone is consistent with survival.
We should not think of this as the
classically competitive part of the system
in contrast with the monopolistic or
oligopolistic sector from which the planning
system has evolved. Rather, in its
combination of competitive and monopolistic
structures, it approaches the entire
neoclassical model. We have, to repeat,
two systems. In one, power is still, as ever,
contained by the market. In another and
still evolving system, power extends incompletely
but comprehensively to markets,
to the people who patronize them, to
the state and thus, ultimately, to resource
use. The coexistence of these two systems
becomes, in turn, a major clue to economic
performance.

III

Power being so comprehensively deployed
in a very large part of the total economy,
there can no longer, except for reasons
of game-playing or more deliberate
intellectual evasion, be any separation by
economists between economics and politics.
When the modern corporation acquires
power over markets, power in the
community, power over the state, power
over belief, it is a political instrument,
different in form and degree but not in
kind from the state itself. To hold otherwise
to deny the political character of
the modern corporation is not merely to
avoid the reality. It is to disguise the reality.
The victims of that disguise are those
we instruct in error. The beneficiaries are
the institutions whose power we so disguise.
Let there be no question: Economics,
so long as it is thus taught, becomes,
however unconsciously, a part of an
arrangement by which the citizen or
student is kept from seeing how he is, or
will be, governed.

This does not mean that economics now
becomes a branch of political science. That
is a prospect by which we would rightly be
repelled. Political science is also the captive
of its stereotypes including that of citizen
control of the state. Also while economics
cherishes thought, at least in principle,
political science regularly accords reverence
to the man who knows only what has
been done before. Economics does not become
a part of political science. But
politics does and must become a part of
economics.

There will be fear that once we abandon
present theory, with its intellectually
demanding refinement and its increasing
instinct for measurement, we shall lose the
filter by which scholars are separated from
charlatans and windbags. These latter are
always a danger, but there is more danger
in remaining with a world that is not real.
And we shall be surprised, I think, at the
new clarity and intellectual consistency
with which we see our world, once power is
made a part of our system. To such a view
let me now turn.

IV

In the neoclassical view of the economy
a general identity of interest between
the goals of the business firm and those
of the community could be assumed. The
firm was subject to the instruction of
the community, either through the market
or the ballot box. People could not be fundamentally
in conflict with themselvesalways
given some reasonable decency in
income distribution. Once the firm in the
planning system is seen to have comprehensive
power to pursue its own interest,