permissible; that is at least partly because
its primary effect is on the neoclassical
entrepreneur who must borrow money.
Monetary constraint is far less painful
for the large established corporation which,
as an elementary exercise of power, has
ensured itself a supply of capital from
earnings or financial affiliates or morally
affiliated banks. The power of the planning
system in the community has also won
immunity for public expenditures important
to itself-highways, industrial research,
rescue loans, national defense.
These have the sanction of a higher public
purpose. A similar if still slightly less successful
effort is being made on behalf of
corporate and personal taxes. So fiscal
policy has also been accommodated to the
interests of the planning system.
Thus the inevitability of controls. The
interaction of corporate and trade union
power can be made to yield only to the
strongest fiscal and monetary restraints.
Those restraints that are available have a
comparatively benign effect on those with
power, but they weigh adversely on people
who vote. When no election is in prospect,
perhaps such a policy is possible. It will
earn applause for its respectability. But it
cannot be tolerated by anyone who must
weigh its popular effect.
As with the need for social action and
organization in the market sector there
are many reasons why it would be well
were economists to accept the inevitability
of wage and price control. It would help
keep politicians, responding to the resonance
of their own past instruction, from
supposing controls to be wicked and unnatural
and hence temporary and to be
abandoned whenever they seemed to be
working. This is a poor mood in which to
develop sound administration. And it
would cause economists themselves to
consider how controls can be made workable
and how the effect on income distribution
can be made equitable. With controls
this last becomes a serious matter.
The market is no longer a disguise for
inequality, however egregious, in income
distribution. Much inequality must
be seen to be the result of relative power.
VI
When power is made part of our system,
yet other matters of considerable current
moment are illuminated. Thus the counterpart
of systemic differences in development
as between the planning and market sectors
of the economy is systemic sectoral
differences in income. In the neoclassical
system, resource mobility is assumed,
broadly speaking, to equalize inter-industry
return. If there is inequality, it is
the result of barriers to movement. Now
we see that, given its comprehensive market
power, the planning system can protect
itself from adverse movements in its terms
of trade. The same power allows it to
accept unions for it need not absorb even
temporarily their demands. In the market
system, some areas of monopoly or union
power apart, there is no similar control of
the terms of trade. Given the absence of
market power there can be no similar
yielding on wage costs for there is no
similar certainty that they can be passed
on. (It is because of the character of the
industry he seeks to organize, not his
original power, that Cesar Chavez is for so
many the new Lenin.) And, in the market
system, the self-employed have the option
not present in the planning system of
reducing their own wages (and sometimes
those of families or immediate employees)
in order to survive.
Thus there is a built-in inequality in
income between the two systems. And
thus also the case for minimum wage
legislation, support to trade unions in
agriculture, price support legislation, and
most important, perhap5, a floor under
family income as antidotes to such interindustry