target air and water quality standards).
Tax penalties of so much per unit would
put price tags on use of the public's air
and water, thus internalizing external
costs and using market incentives to accomplish
depollution rather than relying
on the less efficient route of regulation.
When local governments supply education
and public health services to a mobile
population, many of the benefits spill over
to other units. An important rationale for
federal grants flows from these externalities,
namely, that to get local units to
produce enough education and health
service to achieve a national, not just a
local, cost-benefit optimum requires conditional
grants from the federal purse.
Further, since externalities in the form
of damage to third parties lies at the heart
of many problems in legal justice, economics
is able to make an important contribution
in this area.

When we turn to the empirical outputs
that are now illuminating problems of
public choice, we find the past decade
bristling with new thinking, new techniques,
and new measurements. These
offer the decision maker important new
guides in the seJection and evaluation of
government programs and new insights
into alternative systems of delivering
government services:

Measurement of cost-benefit ratios
has developed from the early metrics
of water projects into, first, a sophisticated
cost-benefit calculus for tangible
investments like dams, roads, pollutioncontrol
projects and, second, cost-benefit
estimates for intangible investments
in human brainpower, skills, and health.
Shadow pricing has been one of the useful
tools in this connection. Cost-benefit
analysis, even with its limits of quantification
and its inability to shed light
on distributional and value questions,
is an important aid to informed decisions.


A related advance is the development
of new and tougher standards for judging
government programs. The former
criteria centered on the question: Is the
program put into effect quickly and with
high fidelity to the congressional intent?
Now, the accountability question is:
Does it deliver the goods? Does it accomplish
the objectives? Inputs used to
be stressed if they conformed with the
intent of the legislation, they tended to
be judged a success. But now we try to
measure outputs, a tougher and more
elusive standard. (The parallel with
judging the performance of economics
and economists is painfully obvious.)
Antipoverty programs, which were
among the first to be evaluated by these
stringent standards, seem to have borne
the brunt of the evaluation boom. By
the old inputs standard, a program like
Head Start would have fared much
better.

The reach of cost-benefit analysis will
be lengthened if a broad range of new
research efforts in nonmarket sectors of
economic activity pays off. I refer not
only to the exciting work on measurement
of the returns on investments in
human capital (T. W. Schultz), but to
efforts to measure the output of the
medical industry, to measure the relations
between crime and punishment,
and to measure the value of nonmarket
economic activity conducted within
firms and households.

The new technique of controlled social
experimentation on proposed welfare
and housing measures, health insurance,
and education vouchers is yielding important
insights. As a result of experiments
on negative income taxation, for
example, the equity versus efficiency, or
equality versus incentives, controversy
will never be conducted in a vacuum