Sketchy as it is, and it is certainly
sketchy, I think my suggested conceptual
framework or something similar offers a
possible starting point. And there are
many intermediate questions to be raised
along the way. We have been witnessing a
significant extension of government control
of the market mechanism in all of the advanced
economies, more so in some than in
others. This intervention ranges from conventional
forms of regulation of particular
industries, to sporadic attempts to impose
one or another kind of incomes policy, to
large-scale programs to redistribute incomes,
to widening experiments in worker
participation, to outright nationalization
of particular firms or industries. What
combinations of pressures have caused this
extension of government intervention;
what forces will extend it further; what
forms will such intervention take; and
what are likely to be the effects on the
allocation of resources, the distribution of
income and wealth, and the rates of inflation
and of growth in total output-not to
mention the possible effects on the various
dimensions of the institutional environment,
including the institution of private
property?
There are many other elements, besides
the few mentioned here, that would have
to be incorporated into a full-fledged, institutionally
oriented theory of economic
development for the advanced economies
of the nonsocialist world. And we need
also to fit in the underdeveloped countries.
Here clearly we have to be political economists,
and not just economists in the neoclassical
sense. We are currently witnessing
powerful political forces at work aimed at
improving the terms of trade of the third
world with the advanced countries. What
will determine the eventual outcome? Mention
of the third world raises a host of other
issues, political as well as economic. These
include the seemingly inexorable advance
of socialism in many of these countries ;22
the effect of autocratic forms of government
on the pace of economic growth, the
allocation of resources, and the distribution
of income; and the ability of these
countries to deal with the population
growth resulting from high birth rates and
declining death rates.
And finally, to repeat, there is for economists
the basic question to which not only
Marx and his followers but also Schumpeter
addressed themselves: What is the future
of capitalism in the advanced economies,
given the growing size and bureaucratization
of business firms, the increasing
strength of organized pressure groups, and
the momentum from the increasing government
intervention that has already occurred?
It seems to me that capitalism as
we know it in this coulntry or even in
Western Europe has little future in the
third world. What is its future in the advanced
economies?
IV
And so, on this somber note, I end. I
have scolded economists for what I think
are the sins that too many of them commit,
and I have tried to point the way to at
least partial redemption. This road to
salvation will not be an easy one for those
who have been seduced by the siren of
mathematical elegance or those who all too
often seek to test unrealistic models without
much regard for the quality or relevance
of the data they feed into their equations.
But let us all continue to worship at
the altar of science. I ask only that our
credo be: "relevance with as much rigor as
possible," and not "rigor regardless of
relevance." And let us not be afraid to ask
-and to try to answer the really big
questions.
22 Which leads at least this observer to wonder how
compatible are democracy and capitalism in an underdeveloped
country whose aspirations are rising much
faster than its means to satisfy them.