tend toward the progressive increase of inequality.
.." (1935, p. 50).
Abilities and other endowments regress
downward from parents to children in successful
families where parents earn a lot, and
they regress upward in unsuccessful families
where parents earn little. The poor underinvest
in each child also because they have
larger families and less stable marriages.
Therefore, children from poorer families tend
to earn more than their parents but below
the average of their generation, and children
from richer families tend to earn less than
their parents but above their generation's
average.
Earnings depend not only on endowments
but also on investments in human capital.
Our earlier analysis implies that richer families
do not tend to underinvest in their
children's human capital because these
families leave gifts and bequests. Poorer
families do tend to underinvest in children
because they are not likely to leave gifts and
bequests. The poor underinvest in each child
also because they have large families and less
stable marriages. Therefore, the relation between
the earning of fathers and sons in
richer families would depend mainly on the
relation between endowments, while the relation
between earnings of fathers and sons
in poorer families would depend also on the
degree of underinvestment in children. Put
differently, without offsetting government
subsidies to investments in the human capital
of poorer children, low earnings would be
more persistent across generations than high
earnings -the so-called "culture of poverty"
across generations would exceed the "culture
of privilege."
In every country with data that I have
seen-this includes the United States and
several European countries (see Table 1 in
Becker and Nigel Tomes, 1986), a few Asian
countries, and some Latin American countries
(James J. Heckman and Joseph V. Hotz,
1986, consider the evidence for Panama)
earnings strongly regress to the mean between
fathers and sons. Probably much less
than 40 percent of the earnings advantages
or disadvantages of fathers pass to sons, and
few earnings advantages or disadvantages
survive three generations. Evidently, abilities
and other endowments that generate earnings
are only weakly transmitted from
parents to children. This tendency to go
from "shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves" in three
generations began long before industrialization
and government support of education
and other human capital. The fourteenth
Arab historian and philosopher, Ibn Khaldtun
said (I owe this reference to my wife, Guity
Nashat), "Prestige is an accident that affects
human beings. It comes into being and decays
inevitably.... It reaches its end in a
single family within four successive generations.
" (1958, p. 279)... "As a rule, no dynasty
lasts beyond the [span] of three generations.
" (p. 343)
In all these countries, low earnings as well
as high earnings are not strongly transmitted
from fathers to sons, and Knight's claim
about family life causing growing inequality
is inconsistent with the evidence. Still, data
for both the United States and England do
appear to confirm the implication of our
theory that low earnings persist more than
high earnings across generations (see W.
Stanley Siebert, 1987). Of course, incomes of
the rich regress down more slowly between
generations than do their earnings because
rich children receive gifts and bequests
from parents (see Becker and Tomes, 1986,
Table 2).
V. Concluding Remarks
I was attracted to the family by its obvious
importance in all countries, no matter
what the economic system or stage of development.
People spend much of their time
in a dependency relation-toward parents
when children and toward grown children in
old age-marriage is a crucial step for most
people, children absorb time, energy, and
money from their parents, divorce often
causes economic hardship and mental depression,
and so forth. Economic studies of
the family are growing at a steady pace and
they are influencing the way other social
scientists look this fundamental institution.
The economic analysis of family behavior
stimulated the development of techniques