is reduced only if the same prices apply to all
persons.

The implausibility of invariance in any market
equilibrium is transparent in the goods market.
Is it possible that the marginal value of a
unit of comfort in an automobile should be the
same as a unit of comfort in an easy chair? Not
at all. These commodities represent different,
imperfectly substitutable services that cannot be
unbundled into such components. We do not see
easy chairs in autos and bucket seats in living
rooms. No "arbitrage" opportunities are available
for trading comfort in one kind of good
with comfort in an entirely different class of
goods, because those characteristics cannot be
untied from the larger bundle of attributes for
which the good was designed. Again, the Law
of One Price does not apply to characteristics,
and their implicit value usually differs among
categories of goods. It would be the same only
by accident.

Similarly, why should the value of another
unit of strength to, say, an accountant be the
same as its value to an athlete? It would be the
same if there were aggregate markets for such
things as strength and intelligence and if a unit
of "accounting strength" was a perfect substitute
for units of "athletic strength" in all productive
activities. The images of accountants on
the 50-yard line and linemen running interference
against the IRS is not, however, reassuring
in this regard. Once again the bundling of personal
productivity characteristics and the impossibility
of untying bundles and repackaging
them into something else is crucial. The marginal
products of underlying factors vary across
activities-strength is more important to professional
athletes than to accountants-and the
shadow prices of these factors vary across activities
as well. Thus, athletes are stronger than
accountants and accountants have more quantitative
skills than athletes. This is another important
manifestation of sorting and stratification in
spatial equilibria.

Activity-specific prices generate comparative
advantage. Just as differences in the relative
abundance of sunshine to rainfall in Portugal
and England give each country its comparative
advantage in wine or cloth, so too does strength
give people who have it a comparative advantage
in some forms of athletics, while arithmetic
skills and attention to detail give other people
comparative advantage in accounting. Comparative
advantage has interesting consequences.
For one, people observed in various job and
educational categories tend to be selected and
stratified by the personal attributes that give
them a competitive edge in a specific field. A
person's financial self-interest is served by selecting
the occupation that maximizes expected
earnings. If this is a major consideration in
occupational choice (though certainly not the
only one), observed earnings of individuals who
voluntarily chose an occupation might be a poor
estimate of what the earnings of people who
avoided that occupation would have been.
Obviously, the earnings of successful athletes
or actresses are not representative of the average
person's prospects in those fields. But the point
is more subtle in other important applications,
for instance in interpreting income differences
between people with more and less education.
As seen above, if all people were identical, the
education-earnings premium would be sustained
by the supply conditions that pay must
compensate for incurring the costs of investment
to equalize net advantages across trades.
When people differ, things are more complicated.
Those who expect the largest returns on
their educational investments are more likely to
make them. Ability rents persist in equilibrium.
There are two main reasons why rates of
return to human-capital investments and human
wealth differ among people. First, natural talents
complement occupation-specific humancapital
investments in different ways. Verbal
ability is indispensable for lawyers and quantitative
ability for engineers and scientists, for
example. People with greater endowments of
such traits have better prospects for success in
those activities. Another way of saying it is that
there are "ability" rents in occupational choices.
Wage differences are not fully equalizing on the
costs of acquiring skills because natural endowments
and premarket investments cause these
costs to differ among people. Second, there are
substantial financial barriers to educational investments
because human capital is not legal
collateral for investment loans. The main manifestation
of this is traditionally seen in high
stratification of educational attainments of children
according to parental wealth. Financing
difficulties cause inefficiencies and inequities in
human-capital investment decisions because