II. The Monetarists' Attack
A. The Stabilizing Power of the
Hicksian Mechanism

The monetarists' attack on Keynesianism was
directed from the very beginning not at the
Keynesian framework as such, but at whether it
really implied a need for stabilization. It rested
on a radically different empirical assessment of
the value of the parameters controlling the stabilizing
power of the Hicksian mechanism and of
the magnitude and duration of response to
shocks, given a stable money supply. And this
different assessment in turn was felt to justify a
radical downgrading of the practical relevance
of the Keynesian framework as distinguished
from its analytical validity.
Liquidity preference was a fine contribution
to monetary theory but in practice the responsiveness
of the demand for money, and hence of
velocity, to interest rates, far from being unmanageably
large, was so small that according to a
well-known paper by Milton Friedman (1969),
it could not even be detected empirically. On the
other hand, the effect of interest rates on aggregate
demand was large and by no means limited
to the traditional fixed investments but quite
pervasive. The difficulty of detecting it empirically
resulted from focusing on a narrow range
of measured market rates and from the fact that
while the aggregate could be counted on to respond,
the response of individual components
might not be stable. Finally, Friedman's celebrated
contribution to the theory of the consumption
function (1957) (and my own work on the
life cycle hypothesis with Richard Brumberg and
others, reviewed by the author, 1975) implied a
very high short-run marginal propensity to save
in response to transient disturbances to income
and hence a small short-run multiplier.
All this justified the conclusion that (i) though
demand shocks might qualitatively work along
the lines described by Keynes, quantitatively the
Hicks mechanism is so strong that their impact
would be small and transient, provided the
stock of money was kept on a steady growth
path; (ii) fiscal policy actions, like other demand
shocks, would have minor and transitory effects
on demand, while changes in money would
produce large and permanent effects on money
income; and, therefore, (iii) the observed instability
of the economy, which was anyway
proving moderate as the postwar period unfolded,
was most likely the result of the unstable
growth of money, be it due to misguided endeavors
to stabilize income or to the pursuit of
other targets, which were either irrelevant or, in
the case of balance of payments goals, should
have been made irrelevant by abandoning fixed
exchanges.

B. The Demise of Wage Rigidity and the
Vertical Phillips Curve

But the most serious challenge came in
Friedman's 1968 Presidential Address, building
on ideas independently put forth also by Phelps
(1968). Its basic message was that, despite appearances,
wages were in reality perfectly flexible
and there was accordingly no involuntary
unemployment. The evidence to the contrary,
including the Phillips curve, was but a statistical
illusion resulting from failure to differentiate between
price changes and unexpected price
changes.

Friedman starts out by reviving the Keynesian
notion that, at any point of time, there exists a
unique full-employment rate which he labels the
"'natural rate." An unanticipated fall in demand
in Friedman's competitive world leads firms to
reduce prices and also output and employment
along the short-run marginal cost curve unless
the nominal wage declines together with prices.
But workers, failing to judge correctly the current
and prospective fall in prices, misinterpret
the reduction of nominal wages as a cut in real
wages. Hence, assuming a positively sloped
supply function, they reduce the supply of labor.
As a result, the effective real wage rises to the
point where the resulting decline in the demand
for labor matches the reduced supply. Thus, output
falls not because of the decline in demand,
but because of the entirely voluntary reduction in
the supply of labor, in response to erroneous
perceptions. Furthermore, the fall in employment