C. Prices
We have just seen that employees' norms
regarding nominal wages may affect bargained
real wages, and therefore cause trade-offs between
long-run inflation and long-run unemployment.
Similarly, customers' norms regarding price levels
and price changes may also cause long-run tradeoffs
between output and inflation.
Indeed, models by Katsuhito Iwai (1981),
Julio J. Rotemberg (1982), and Andrew S. Caplin
and John Leahy (1991) all have long-run
trade-offs between inflation and unemployment.  Each of these models assumes that there are real
costs to nominal price changes. If, instead, there
were real costs to real price changes, the assumptions
of natural rate theory would still be
satisfied, and no such trade-off would occur.
These models then pose the question why there
should be such real costs from nominal price
changes. Iwai, Rotemberg, and Caplin and
Leahy all respectively assume that there is a
"menu" cost in making these changes known.80
But the physical costs of making such changes,
as in the printing of new menus, are trivially
small. Norms regarding price changes, however,
give an alternative reason why these costs
might--indeed-be of sufficient size to induce
a significant long-run trade-off between inflation
and unemployment. Customers may think
that firms should not raise prices. In that case,
price increases (or increases of greater size) are
likely to induce angry customers to search for
alternative suppliers. At higher steady-state inflation,
firms will be changing their nominal
prices more, and therefore will face more elastic
demands for their product. Producers' natural
microeconomic response to this increased elasticity-
a lower price for their product-will
produce a macroeconomic trade-off between inflation
and aggregate demand.
Just as sticky money wages indicated that
employees have norms regarding wage change,
similarly, sticky prices indicate that customers
have norms regarding price change. Thus, the  extensive evidence on price stickiness reveals
violation of the assumptions of natural rate theory,
and also the existence of norms regarding
price change. Like wage changes, price changes
also agglomerate at zero. Dennis Carlton (1986)
has shown that prices are often sticky for significant
periods of time.81 Furthermore, prices
seem to be especially sticky in customer markets.
82 Alan Kackmeister (2002) has compared
price changes at the end of the nineteenth century
to such changes a bit more than a century
later. Price changes of specific goods at retail
stores were recorded from June 1889 to September
1891; Kackmeister revisited the same
commodities and their price change for a comparable
period, from June 1997 to September
1999. Price change in the late twentieth century
was five times more frequent than a century
earlier. Furthermore, in the nineteenth century,
the average spell of constant price for an individual
good was very long. It was approximately
80 months.83 Such constancy of prices
can easily be explained by customer norms regarding
price change. The customers have a
notion of the price that they ought to pay at
stores where they are continued and knowing
customers. Kackmeister suggests that the decline
in long-term customer relationships is one
factor responsible for greater frequency of price
change today.
Emi Nakamura and J6n Steinsson (2005)
give an economic reason why customers would
have such a norm that firms should not change
prices. They view consumer purchases as habitforming.
Thus, by buying a particular brand, or
patronizing a particular store, consumers are
putting themselves in a position where they can
be exploited. Their loyalty puts the firm in a
have notions regarding what nominal wage increases should  or should not be. This, of course, is just one of many
anomalies in the form of indexed contracts.
80oMarika Karanassou, Hector Sala, and Dennis J.  Snower (2003) find considerable long-run trade-off between  inflation and unemployment in a model with nominal price  staggering and money growth.  81 See also Blinder and Don Choi (1990) and Blinder et
al. (1998).  82 The meaning of customer markets was especially explored
by Arthur Okun (1978).  83 derive this result from Kackmeister's data in the
following way. He finds that in the nineteenth century, only  5 percent of items changed their prices per month. This  means that the average spell of constant prices would have  been 20 months (the inverse). But that is a biased statistic
for the average length of time between price changes for an  item on the shelf. The difference between the average spell  of employment or unemployment and the average spell  being experienced by an individual suggests a rule of thumb  ratio for four to one. Using this ratio as a rule of thumb  suggests that the spell between price changes averaged over
the individual items on the shelf would be 80 months.