of capital. About the relationship between
the average rate from the progress-activities
and the conventionally estimated marginal
product of capital it is possible to
make reasonably "objective" numerical
statements, though unfortunately not very
precise ones, because some statements that
can be made about the average rates from
the progress-activities imply merely value
judgments that are very widely shared.
In particular, a great many individuals
would agree that an unduly strict criterion
of overall social profitability, and
hence of required average social rates of
return, is set by charging the full cost of
the knowledge-acquisition activities of
governments and of teaching and research
institutions to measured productivity
trends, as if the nonmarket contribution
of these activities were zero. At the
same time, most individuals would, I
think, agree that it is useful to inquire into
the question of average social rates of return
also by valuing the nonmarket contribution
of the politically or quasi-politically
determined progress-inputs at full
cost to the nonprofit institutions as if no
favorable effect on the market-sector were
required to justify these inputs on their
present scale. I surmise that the valuation
convincing to most persons would be located
either within, or not significantly
outside, the range described by these two
frames of reference for valuation. In this
sense, our two benefit-cost ratios describe a
range which should be of some use to most
decision makers, particularly because the
usefulness of the framework is admittedly
limited. A verdict of social profitability as
expressed by adequate average rates of
return is compatible with anyone's personal
judgment that the progress-activities
could be made even more profitable by
changing the controversial content of
political compromises concerning the composition
of the inputs. While the present
paper will not lose sight of these highly
controversial questions involving marginality,
I will try to separate these from
the problems that can be analyzed on a
reasonably "objective" level. In practice,
this objectivity becomes reduced by the
need to fill in gaps in the available data by
operations that at times become very
speculative.
More ambitious contributions of other
authors are revealing in many ways but
they do not remove the limitations we
need to observe in our present context. For
example, from empirical investigations one
may conclude that additional educationeducation
at the margin-is profitable by
market criteria alone, even without regard
to socially desirable external effects and to
the nonmarket value which is acquired.'8
This is a significant result, and it has important
applications, but it cannot be put
to use in our present analysis. Additional
education is profitable very largely be
cause our technology is becoming increasingly
complex, a process which in turn
presupposes additional education. Recognition
of this takes us back to the problem
of the social worth of the activities that
lead to the increasing complexity of our
technological and organizational methods.
III. The Residual: A Roundabout Way of
Measuring Productivity-Increases
The method here to be used for estimating
productivity gains leads to higher
estimates than do some procedures that
have occasionally been suggested. Yet I
feel that the method needs to be defended
not so much against methods that attribute
a smaller component of growth to
progress, but against methods that attribute
to progress an even larger growthcomponent.
As concerns the United States,
an argument could be made for the view
that practically all long-run increase in
output per man-hour (or possibly more
than this) involves invention and/or
18 See particularly Gary S. Becker.