human-capital stocks.2' The appearance of
such investment opportunities is the essence
of growth and change. They are largely dis-
equilibrium phenomena, resulting in a
lurching from one "steady state" to another
rather than something smooth and expo-
nential. The presence of locally increasing
returns, network externalities, asymmetric
information, and heterogeneous expecta-
tions, the appearance of new products and
technologies, and the changes in the politi-
cal and regulatory environments are all
sources of such "excess" returns, while the
ex post fixity of much of the investment in
both physical and human capital causes cap-
ital gains and losses and unanticipated "ob-
solescence" in the various stocks. We will
have to figure out how to take the residual
apart along such lines to make more
progress in understanding its proximate
sources.
Our theories tend to assume that we are,
indeed, at the frontier and that we can only
either move along it or try to shift it, the
latter being a difficult and chancy business.
In fact we may be far from our existing
"frontiers." Harvey Leibenstein's (1966)
ideas about X-efficiency, or more correctly
X-inefficiency, did not get much of a sympa-
thetic ear from us. They were inconsistent
with notions of equilibrium, the absence of
unexploited profit opportunities, and the
possibilities for economic arbitrage. But real
economic growth is the consequence of both
the appearance of such disequilibria and
the devising of ways of closing them. How
quickly they are eliminated depends on the
strength of incentive systems within enter-
prises, and on their organizational quality.
In spite of the large growth in the literature
on organizations, we have not yet developed
useful ways of quantifying their strengths
and weaknesses. Nor are we close to having
measures of such factors as the "work ethic"
or aspects of the property-rights system
which are likely to contribute much to the
observed differences in productivity across
nations.
The "new" growth theories have various
externalities as their centerpiece (see Solow
[1991] for a recent review). It is somewhat
ironic that they have come to the fore just
when growth started declining and notions
of eternal exponential growth began to lose
their luster. Knowledge externalities are ob-
viously very important in the growth pro-
cess, but they do not help us to explain what
has happened in the last two decades. There
is no reason to believe that they have de-
clined over time. If anything, the communi-
cation and transportation advances should
have expanded the availability of such exter-
nalities.22 But we have no good models for
the measurement of such processes.
Knowledge is not like a stock of ore,
sitting there waiting to be mined. It is an
extremely heterogenous assortment of infor-
mation in continuous flux. Only a small part
of it is of any use to someone at a particular
point of time, and it takes effort and re-
sources to access, retrieve, and adapt it to
one's own use. Thus models of externalities
must perforce be models of interaction be-
tween different actors in the economy. We
have, however, very few convincing models
of such interactions, and the identification
problems are severe (see e.g., Charles Man-
ski, 1993). Our measurement frameworks
are not set up to record detailed origin and
destination data for commodity flows, much
less so for information flows. We do have
now a new tool for studying some of this:
citations to patents and the scientific litera-
ture (see e.g., Jaffe et al., 1993), but anyone
currently active in the e-mail revolution and
participating in the conferences and work-
shops circuit knows how small this tip is
relative to the informal-communications
iceberg itself.