by personal activities that would characterize
the most free and open societies. They are necessary
to sustain both human-capital investment
incentives and work incentives.
For example, in almost every society doctors
earn more than other people. These wage differentials
persist in equilibrium in order to compensate
prospective medical students for their
arduous and costly training. The number and
quality of doctors would fall if earnings were
artificially compressed and the rate of return to
medical education was reduced. A society with
few doctors would score more egalitarian points
on a Gini coefficient, but it would not be a better
society. This example is trivial, but the point is
far more general and often not so obvious.
Much inequality in the overall distribution of
earnings is attributable to substantial differences
in mean earnings among workers of different
ages and educational attainments that
are associated with occupational choices and
human-capital investments over the life cycle.
They reflect rational personal choices that
change a person's economic status and current
incomes over a lifetime.
Rising earnings over working life as well as
earnings differences between occupational
and educational categories largely reflect returns
to human-capital investments. A clear
distinction between human-capital (lifetime)
wealth and current earnings is needed because
learning always involves choosing prospects
with smaller earnings now and higher earnings
in the future. Observing that a person has
low current earnings is no signal of lifetime
poverty if future earnings will be high. Similarly,
high current earnings are no signal of
excess wealth if a person paid the price in low
previous earnings. The point is that the distribution
of current income is far more unequal
than the distribution of human-capital
wealth. Inequality indexes based on current
data alone give a very misleading impression
of true inequality.
The reasoning is most easily understood in
terms of an example. Consider a completely
equal society in which all workers have exactly
the same age-earnings profiles over their careers.
Then the distribution of annual earnings is
a deterministic function of the age distribution
of workers. Societies with more variation in
worker age show more inequality, but that is not
a very interesting aspect of inequality. In fact,
the age distribution makes an enormous difference
to measured inequality indexes: earnings
data used to assess inequality that are not age
standardized are practically worthless for assessing
inequality. Remarkably, such adjustments
are seldom made. Standardizing current
earnings data for education presents more difficult
conceptual problems because family backgrounds
and personal financial barriers on
educational choices distort investment margins
and make wage differentials not fully equalizing
on costs. Nonetheless, some portion of educational
wage differences-and, judging from
the remarkable uniformity of estimated rates of
return to education in different countries, perhaps
a major portion-are equalizing on their
costs. They represent productive, socially manufactured
diversity and inequality that we cannot
live very well without.
V. Personal Productivity and the Distribution of
Earnings
Of course, not all differences are willfully
created. Many are caused by inherited interpersonal
differences in talents and tastes. The hedonic
or characteristics approach to labor
markets bears similarities to statistical factoranalytic
ideas in accounting for earnings differences
across individuals. Factor analysis
partitions observed variance into a small number
of unobserved, latent "causes" or factors. A
leading example is intelligence testing, where
test scores are thought to reflect the quantitative,
analytical, verbal, and mechanical abilities of
subjects. Similarly, personal productivity and
earning power are ultimately determined by
such things as strength, intelligence, dexterity,
and attention to detail. Think of a model in
which a person's earning power is "scored" as
the sum of the amounts of each attribute possessed,
times their market prices. If the number
of factors is small, important proximate causes
of the distribution of earnings are reduced to
small dimensions. The economic rationale for
compacting the determinants of earnings into a
small set of universal factors and prices turns on
the existence of unique economywide prices
("loadings") on the factors. Since these price
weights are parameters in any factor representation
of earnings across persons, dimensionality