ever, the success achieved here makes this
part of economics resemble more a branch
of engineering than a social science. And at
the level of the individual firm some progress
continues to be made in empirical
studies of production and cost functions,
the determinants of the demand for inputs,
the transmission of technical change, and
related topics. I do not wish to minimize
the value of this work. But we should not
ignore the extent to which rigorous formulations
of the theory of the firm have had
to be relaxed in order to obtain useful results
in empirical work. Nor, I might add,
should we forget the extent to which conventional
theory ignores how and why
work is organized within the firm and
establishment in the way that it is, what
may be called the "social relations" of the
production process.
Some success in blending rigor and relevance
has also been achieved in the field of
household behavior-ranging from studies
of the determinants of consumers' demand
to recent work on human capital, the behavior
of labor markets, the economics of
crime, and the like. I must confess to some
skepticism, however, about the relevance
of the economic models of household behavior
recently developed by Gary Becker
and his followers-what has been referred
to as "the new home economics." Granted
that much useful work has been done in
this area. Nonetheless there is a lamentable
tendency among scholars in this field to
rely upon a caricature of human beings
who continuously and consciously balance
costs and benefits at the margin, whether
in deciding on another year of schooling,
whether and when to marry or be divorced,
how many children to have and when, or
whether and when to commit a crime. And
after a substantial amount of intensive research,
the human capital approach still
leaves unexplained a significant part of the
differences in personal incomes.
In the second area mentioned, particularly
general equilibrium theory, it seems
to me that relevance has been largely absent
in the recent literature. To find much
relevance at the theoretical level, and I
refer here only to the theoretical literature,
we must go back to the partial-equilibrium
analysis of Alfred Marshall and his followers.
Walras, Pareto, and their successors-
with their assumptions of atomistic
competition, perfectly flexible prices, costless
information, and limitless futures markets-
have contributed little to relevance
in their steadfast pursuit of rigor. Although
a step in the right direction, recent attempts
to develop a pure theory of disequilibrium
are subject to much the same
criticism.
Rigor and relevance have been successfully
blended in input-output analysis,
although largely at the expense of ignoring
the price sensitivity of input-output coefficients.
Here again, the emphasis is on
engineering-type relationships, but in this
case the entire economy is the object of
study.
Micro-economic analysis, as I have noted,
concerns itself with "the allocation of
scarce resources among unlimited and competing
uses." As economists we are concerned
with how resources may be allocated
efficiently, and we are prepared to
provide the layman and the policymaker
with a rigorous definition of efficiency. But
"efficient allocation" for whose benefit? To
me it has always been startling that the
accepted province of micro-economic theory
has little room for the personal distribution
of income-and virtually none
for the personal distribution of wealth. Of
course, we speak of "distribution," but by
this we mean either factor prices or total
factor shares.
Why wealth and labor services, the latter
carrying widely different market-determined
prices, are distributed among different
human beings in the way they actually
are is a question that the non-Marxian