important objective is to account for the sharp
acceleration in the level of economic activity
since 1995 and, in particular, to document the
role of information technology.
The appropriate framework for analyzing
the impact of information technology is the
production possibility frontier, giving outputs
of IT investment goods as well as inputs of IT
capital services. An important advantage of
this framework is that prices of IT outputs and
inputs are linked through the price of IT capital
services. This framework successfully
captures the substitutions among outputs and
inputs in response to the rapid deployment of
IT. It also encompasses costs of adjustment,
while allowing financial markets to be modeled
independently.

As a consequence of the swift advance of
information technology, a number of the most
familiar concepts in growth economics have
been superseded. The aggregate production
function heads this list. Capital stock as a measure
of capital input is no longer adequate to
capture the rising importance of IT. This completely
obscures the restructuring of capital input
that is such an important wellspring of the
growth resurgence. Finally, hours worked must
be replaced as a measure of labor input.
A. Production Possibility Frontier
The production possibility frontier describes
efficient combinations of outputs and inputs for
the economy as a whole.29 Aggregate output Y
consists of outputs of investment goods and
consumption goods. These outputs are produced
from aggregate input X, consisting of
capital services and labor services. Productivity
is a "Hicks-neutral" augmentation of aggregate
input.

The production possibility frontier takes the
form:

(1) Y(In 9 IC , Is, It,9 Cn 9 Cc)
where the outputs include non-IT investment
goods I,, and investments in computers Ic, software
IS' and communications equipment It, as
well as non-IT consumption goods and services
Cn and IT capital services to households and
governments Cc. Inputs include non-IT capital
services Kn and the services of computers Kc,
software Ks, and telecommunications equipment
K, as well as labor input L.30 Totalfactor
productivity (TFP) is denoted by A.
The most important advantage of the production
possibility frontier is the explicit role that it
provides for constant quality prices of IT products.
These are used as deflators for nominal
expenditures on IT investments to obtain the
quantities of IT outputs. Investments in IT are
cumulated into stocks of IT capital. The flow of
IT capital services is an aggregate of these
stocks with service prices as weights. Similarly,
constant quality prices of IT capital services are
used in deflating the nominal values of consumption
of these services.

Another important advantage of the production
possibility frontier is the incorporation of costs of
adjustment. For example, an increase in the output
of IT investment goods requires forgoing part of
the output of consumption goods and non-IT investment
goods, so that adjusting the rate of investment
in IT is costly. However, costs of
adjustment are external to the producing unit and
are fully reflected in If prices. These prices incorporate
forward-looking expectations of the future
prices of If capital services.
B. Aggregate Production Function
The aggregate production function employed
by Robert M. Solow (1957, 1960) and, more recently,
by Jeremy Greenwood et al. (1997, 2000),
Arnold C. Harberger (1998), and Hercowitz
(1998) is a competing methodology. The production
function gives a single output as a function of
capital and labor inputs. There is no role for separate
prices of investment and consumption goods
and, hence, no place for constant quality IF price
indexes for outputs of IF investment goods.
Greenwood et al. employ a price index for
consumption to deflate the output of all