average social benefit-cost ratio which a
person is willing to accept as relevant to his
behavior as a voter, adviser, or adminis-
trator is unlikely to fall significantly out-
side the range bounded by the two ratios
we have defined. Our lower ratio involv-
ing our all-inclusive cost-base completely
disregards the value of new knowledge
per se and also its instrumental value for
the performance of services made available
to the public through channels other than
those of the market. Our higher ratio in-
volving merely the costs of the institution-
ally profit-oriented progress-inputs implies
that the given scale of the progress-gen-
erating activities of governments and other
nonprofit organizations would be justi-
fiable even if these activities had no favor-
able effect whatever on the market sector;
in view of the actual scale of these activi-
ties in the contemporary American econ-
omy, such a judgment would, I think, be
interpreted by most individuals as describ-
ing valuation at, or near, the upper limit
of the range of reasonable valuations. Thus,
for what we may consider typical valu-
ation, our lower boundary seems convinc-
ing as such, and our upper boundary seems
not far off the mark as such.
Can these propositions concerning alter-
natively computed ratios of social benefit
stream to cost provide guidance for the
appraisal of the results of the American
progress-generating activities? I suggest
that the answer is in the affirmative,
though it must be recognized that an af-
firmative answer implies a rather modest
interpretation of what it means to be
guided in one's behavior by an estimated
rate of return. Such a limitation is inherent
in any analysis that focuses on average
rates of return for successive periods. Yet
there is good reason for choosing this focus
in the central part of the present analysis.
We are concerned here with activities
for which the marginal social returns, and
hence the ultimately relevant social allo-
cation criteria, are not capable of being
estimated by examining private or national
accounts. Even with regard to the progress-
generating inputs financed by profit-seek-
ing institutions, significant external effects
and shifts in competitive positions create
differentials between social returns and the
private marginal returns of the innovating
firms. For the diffusion of knowledge in the
market sector reduces their profits, while
gains in competitive position achieved dur-
ing the intervening period may prove en-
during. These gains increase the private
returns. At the same time, the spillover
effect of the progress-activities originating
in the nonprofit institutions expresses it-
self in part in private market-returns. As
for the progress-generating activities of
nonprofit institutions, obviously there ex-
ists no way of approximating from ac-
counting data the value of their nonmarket
contribution or that of their spillover effect
on the market economy. When appraising
marginal social returns each individual is
entitled to his own standards, and where
the problem is one of politically determined
inputs, individual valuations will not lead
to the quantity-adjustments which would
work toward equalization of returns at the
margin."5
In such circumstances only one state-
ment can be made about the marginal
criteria of desirable allocation on a reason-
ably "objective" (or general) level of dis-
course. The statement is that once a very
large number of individual preferences con-
cerning the ranking of the specific objectives
of the progress-activities have been bridged