III. Social Preference, Social Choice,
and Impossibility
The preceding discussion makes abun-
dant use of the idea of "social preference."
Should it be dropped, as suggested by
Buchanan? And if so, what would remain of
Arrow's impossibility theorem?
We have to distinguish between two quite
different uses of the notion of "social pref-
erence," related respectively to (i) the oper-
ation of decision mechanisms, and (ii) the
making of social welfare judgments. The first
notion of "social preference" is something
like the "underlying preference" on which
choices actually made for the society by
prevailing mechanisms are implicitly based
-a kind of "revealed preference" of the
society.11 This "derivative" view of social
preference would be, formally, a binary rep-
resentation of the choices emerging from
decision mechanisms.
The second idea of "social preference"
as social welfare judgments-reflects a view
of the social good: some ranking of what
would be better or worse for the society.
Such judgments would be typically made by
a given person or agency. Here too an ag-
gregation is involved, since an individual
who is making judgments about social wel-
fare, or about the relative goodness of dis-
tinct social states, must somehow combine
the diverse interests and preferences of dif-
ferent people.
Buchanan's objection is quite persuasive
for the first interpretation (involving deci-
sion mechanisms), especially since there is
no a priori presumption that the mecha-
nisms used must -or even should -neces-
sarily lead to choices that satisfy the re-
quirements of binary representation (not to
mention the more exacting demands of an
ordering representation).12 On the other
hand, the second interpretation does not
involve this problem, and even an individual
when expressing a view about social welfare
needs a concept of this kind.13 When ap-
plied to the making of social welfare judg-
ments by an individual or an agency, Arrow's
impossibility theorem thus cannot be dis-
puted on the ground that some organic exis-
tence is being imputed to the society. The
amelioration of impossibility must be sought
elsewhere (see Section IV). However,
Buchanan's critique of Arrow's theorem
would apply to mechanisms of social deci-
sion (such as voting procedures).
Would the dropping of the requirement
that social choices be based on a binary
relation-in particular a transitive ordering
-negate the result in the case of social
decision mechanisms? A large literature has
already established that the arbitrariness of
power, of which Arrow's case of dictator-
ship is an extreme example, lingers in one
form or another even when transitivity is
dropped, so long as some regularity is de-
manded (such as the absence of cycles).'4
There is, however, cause for going further,
precisely for the reasons identified by
Buchanan, and to eschew not just the tran-
sitivity of social preference, but the idea of
social preference itself. All that is needed
from the point of view of choice is that the
decision mechanisms determine a "choice
function" for the society, which identifies