on investments in human capital may not
fall and may even rise as the stock of human
capital grows.

Perhaps it was reasonable in Malthus's
time to neglect investments in human capital,
but there is little excuse for the neglect in
neoclassical growth theory. Modern economies
spend enormous amounts on education
and other training of children, and parents'
investments in children are a far more important
source of an economy's capital stock
than are bequests or the life-cycle accumulation
of physical capital. Dale Jorgenson and
Barbara Fraumeni (1987) estimate that human
capital comprises over 70 percent of the
total capital stock in the United States. This
estimate may be too low because it does not
include the contribution of human capital to
output in the household sector (the authors
do try to estimate household output). Seventy
percent may be higher than the true
fraction because it makes no allowance for
the contribution of "raw labor" to output. I
would guess that the true ratio of human
capital to the total capital stock may be as
high as 90 percent or as low as 50 percent.
Of course, even this lower percentage signifies
a large contribution. The neglect of
human capital in wealth and income accounts
greatly distorts comparisons of savings propensities
and the accumulation of wealth.
Only recently have growth models begun
to appreciate the potential of the learningby-
having property of human capital for
generating sustained growth in per capita
incomes (see Paul Romer, 1986; Robert E.
Lucas, Jr., 1988; and Robert G. King and
Sergio Rebelo, 1986; pioneering earlier work
includes Kenneth J. Arrow, 1962; Yoram
Ben-Porath, 1967; Hirofumi Uzawa, 1965;
and Sherwin Rosen, 1976). Kevin M. Murphy
and I are developing an analysis that combines
such a human capital technology with
unskilled labor, physical capital, and endogenous
fertility that results from altruism. (See
Gary S. Becker, 1971, pp. 204, 207-208, for
an earlier effort to combine human capital,
unskilled labor, and physical capital.) Our
model has a " Malthusian" equilibrium where
per capita income is constant and low and
fertility is high. However, if this equilibrium
receives big enough technology and other
shocks-good luck may be required-the
economy takes off toward a perpetual growth
equilibrium with a decline in fertility and
increased investment per child. Knowledge
continues to grow through its embodiment
in additional human capital.
Family economics is critical to the analysis
since choices about number of children
and investments in each child's human
capital helps determine whether the economy
ends up at a "good" (i.e., growth) equilibrium
or at a "bad" (i.e., Malthusian) equilibrium.
Obviously, we do not have the full
answer to economic growth-public policies,
conglomeration effects, and other considerations
are surely important-but I do believe
that our story contributes a sizable part of
the answer.

III. Short and Long Cycles
Let me now turn briefly to the relation
between family behavior and cycles in aggregate
output and other variables. For centuries
marriages, births, and other family
behavior have been known to respond to
fluctuations in aggregate output and prices.
In an early use of regression analysis in the
social sciences, G. Udny Yule (1906) demonstrated
that English marriages and births
in the nineteenth century moved together
with the business cycle. Subsequent studies
showed that higher order as well as first
births, divorce rates, and possibly the labor
force participation of secondary workers
all fluctuated procyclically in many countries
(see, for example, Becker, 1960, and
Morris Silver, 1965). Birth rates in the United
States apparently became countercyclical
after many married women entered the labor
force. Children are cheaper during recessions
because the value of time spent on children
by working mothers is low then (see William
P. Butz and Michael P. Ward, 1979). Investments
in education and other human capital
are much less procyclical than investments
in physical capital also because the foregone
value of time spent in school is cheaper
during bad times (Linda N. Edwards, 1975).
Of course, none of the competing macro
models of business cycles-be they Keynesian,
monetarist, neoclassical, or real-rely