integrate them more efficiently into the existing
production structures (Paul David,
1991).

Similar arguments, can be (and have been)
made about the difficulties in measuring the
contribution of R&D to productivity growth
(see Griliches, 1979). From one-third to over
half of all industrial R&D is "sold" to the
government, either in the form of research
contracts and prototypes or indirectly in the
form of weapons and space equipment, and
its direct productivity effects do not show up
in the data at all. Private R&D investment
is also likely to have followed the economy
and shifted its targets toward the fastergrowing
sectors, with more invention and
technical change occurring exactly where we
have more trouble in measuring them.
Not only has the economy shifted into
uncharted waters, but even in the "measurable"
sectors accelerating rates of change
have destroyed the basis for some of the
older compromises. Currently, new goods
are introduced into the various official price
indexes rather slowly. While attempts are
being made to reduce the revision cycle in
the producer price index from five to two
years for some of the more high-tech goods,
this may still not be fast enough. In the
personal-computers market, for example,
the life of a model has recently fallen to a
year or less (Berndt et al., 1993).
Dealing with the quality-change problem
by treating every version of a product sold
to a different type of customer as a separate
commodity, as is currently the predominant
official practice, creates its own problems.
By linking out the decline in prices experienced
by consumers in their shift to supermarkets,
discount stores, and mail-order
purchases, it underestimates significantly not
only the output of se;rvices, but also the
output of some of the more "standard"
manufacturing industries (Marshall Reinsdorf,
1993). A prime example of that is the
treatment of generics in the pharmaceutical
price indexes. The stylized facts are as follows:


(i) Generics are introduced at roughly half
the price of the original brand.
(ii) The brand price, however, does not,
decline (it sometimes even goes up),
with the ex-monopolist depreciating
optimally her original position and with
generics gaining between half and
three-quarters of the market for the
particular drug.

(iii) But because generic versions are
treated as separate commodities, in
spite of what the FDA says, the price
index does not fall, and since the value
of shipments declines as the market
shifts to generics (and to hospital and
HMO formularies), so does measured
"output" in this industry and the associated
productivity measures (Griliches
and lain Cockburn, 1993).
This might explain the rather strange
fact that during the last decade pharmaceuticals,
an industry with one of the highest
R&D-sales ratios, had a rather dismal
productivity-growth performance. This was
the period with an increasing penetration of
generics, which should have reduced measured
prices in this industry but did not.
The measurement environment has deteriorated
also in other ways. There is less
willingness on the part of firms and consumers
to respond to detailed questions,
and our government has done little to emphasize
the importance of good economic
data to its own functioning or the overall
understanding of our economy. The consequence
of such deterioration can be illustrated
by the uncertainty about the level of
industrial investment in basic research, an
investment which many think is crucial to
our long-run economic performance
(Griliches, 1986a). Because the question that
asks about the allocation of total R&D expenditures
by the "character of work" is not
mandatory and is also not an easy one to
answer, less than half of all the firms surveyed
in 1988 answered it. As a result of
such nonresponse, the best that can be done
is to produce a "reasonable" range of estimates,
based on alternative imputation algorithms,
from $2.5 to $8.2 billion (and a
"central" guess of $3.9 billion), which leaves
us really in the dark as to what has happened