Under circumstances in which uncertainty
is overpowering, as Keynes suggested was
often the case for stock prices, a price may
remain approximately stable for a consid-
erable time on the basis of a tacit "conven-
tion," which market participants come to
accept. The convention amounts to the as-
sumption that
... the existing state of affairs will con-
tinue indefinitely, except in so far as
we have specific reasons to expect a
change... For, if there exist organized
investment markets,... an investor can
legitimately encourage himself with the
idea that the only risk he runs is that of
a genuine change in the news over the
near future, as to the likelihood of which
he can attempt to form his own judg-
ment, and which is unlikely to be very
large. For, assuming that the conven-
tion holds good, it is only these changes
which can affect the value of his invest-
ment, and he need not lose his sleep
merely because he has not any notion
of what his investment will be worth
ten years hence.
[General Theory, pp. 152-53]
Thus, the price of gold might well, for a
considerable period of time, fluctuate nar-
rowly around a level far from the equi-
librium price at which amounts produced
and consumed would in the long run be
equal. And so, although to a considerably
lesser extent, could the price of wheat or tin.
Yet such a period of approximate stability
might at any time be upset by a major,
self-maintaining movement in either direc-
tion.
IV. Macroeconomic Inventory Theory
Let us now turn to some of the macroeco-
nomic implications of this microeconomic
theory of commodity prices and inventories.
First, and most important, is to recognize
that there is nothing in standard price the-
ory-even when we expand it to take account
of speculative demands for inventories, price
bubbles, or of the possible transmission of
speculative fever from one market to an-
other-that implies that the aggregate stock
of inventories, and the rate of aggregate
inventory accumulation for an entire econ-
omy should exhibit any systematic variation
over time. Random disturbances to supply
and/or demand for particular commodities
or products might lead to periods of net
accumulation or net decumulation of inven-
tories of those products. But the aggregation
of many time-series, each subject to random,
non-serially-correlated variation, produces
only a time-series with proportionally smaller
variation. Thus, several years of systematic
general accumulation of inventories, fol-
lowed by substantial periods of general
decumulation of inventories, finds no basis
in conventional price theory.
Yet one of the most obvious macroeco-
nomic facts of life is the existence of pro-
nounced cycles, both in the size of aggregate
inventories and in their rate of accumulation.
Indeed, of all of the conventional subaggre-
gates of real national product, the one that
shows the greatest decrease (not merely in
percentage but in aggregate dollar amount)
between periods of business expansion and
of business contraction is, almost invariably,
that of the net addition to business invento-
ries. This total typically goes from a large
positive amount at business cycle peaks to
a large negative amount at business cycle
troughs. This difference exceeds the typical
cyclical decline in business investment in
plant and equipment, in residential construc-
tion, in purchases by consumers or govern-
ments, or in net exports. The existence of
these pronounced cycles in aggregate inven-
tory accumulation has long challenged mac-
roeconomists to develop theories that might
explain this phenomenon. The response to
this challenge has produced a second and
macroeconomic literature about inventories,
that is almost completely nonintersecting
with microeconomic price theory.
In this macroeconomic inventory litera-
ture, prices and price expectations are rare-