the current fashion for exalting
Ricardo over his successors; Ricardo implicitly
equated supply and demand on all
his markets without ever realizing the
problematic nature of this process. Jevons
felt obliged to enunciate explicitly a Law
of Indifference, enforced by arbitrage; but
this does not really meet the problem when
the market is out of equilibrium, for the
arbitrage might well not be feasible.
Menger, at least according to Hayek and
Streissler, concentrated on individual trades
and ignored the market completely. It is
Walras's auctioneer which has proved to
have had the most enduring effect on subsequent
theoretical development, and the
stability theory which flows from that concept
is still the subject of vigorous theoretical
development, though very little
empirical application. What is envisioned
is a feedback mechanism in which errors
in the price are successively corrected by
reference to the disequilibria they generate.
This view specifies and makes feasible
the operations of the market. But on one
hand the stability models are far from
adequate representations even of the dynamics
of the neoclassical models and,
what may be connected, the results are by
no means necessarily favorable to the
stability of the adjustment process; and on
the other hand, the motivations for the
feedback to operate are obscure.
Let me be clear on one methodological
point. The fact that our intuitive understanding,
our verstehen as the German
social methodologists call it, of the market
as an institution is not entirely satisfactory
does not mean that we should not use the
perfect market as a model, at least pending
further development. Certainly, as Popper
and Friedman hold, the acceptability of a
theory is to be judged by its ability to
predict and understand phenomena. The
theory of the perfect market is in an interesting
way complementary to Keynesian
theory. We have never been able to
integrate Keynesian viewpoints into standard
neoclassical theory, in terms of individual
motivation, yet this theory, with
its various modifications, has been a most
serviceable tool of prediction and control.
In fact, it is useful in domains where competitive
theory fails and vice versa. Neither
theory is good, however, at predicting dynamic
processes, the short-run changes
which are responses to disequilibria, and it
is here that the pressure for a more satisfactory
model arises.

Hold in abeyance for a moment our considerations
about the market. Let us return
to the optimization problem of the individual.
One aspect on which we put a
good deal of weight, particularly in our less
formal discussions, is that a market system
is informationally economical. That is, we
tend to regard it as a virtue of the system
that the individual agent need not know
very much. Specifically, he is supposed to
know the motivation and production conditions
which define him, i.e., his utility
function and production possibility set,
together with the prices of the commodities
he buys and sells. The economic system,
taken as a whole, has vastly more in it
than any one individual knows; it contains
the utility functions and production possibilities
of all individual agents. Indeed,
the apparent modesty of the information
needed is one of the most appealing aspects
of the neoclassical model, both in the
descriptive sense that the individual's decision
problems appear manageable for him
and for the economist studying him, and
in the normative sense that the system
permits its members to spend their time
and effort at producing goods rather than
in unnecessary duplication of information.
But clearly this simplification of the individual'
s decision making is made possible
only because the markets have supplied
the information economized on, in the form
of prices. In equilibrium, at least, the system
as a whole gives the impression of