example, disregard problems which the
changing structure and role of the family
bring in their train. The state of our cities
with all their problems of poverty, crime
and deteriorating education, and all their
exposure to the pressures of racial concentration
and frustration, should be a sufficient
reminder. All are bound up with the
productivity growth process itself. They are
sources of antagonism, conflict, and decline
of personal quality which will work to constrain
growth unless moderated.
VIII
In the new, less-favorable growth environment,
the tensions between productivity and
other welfare goals are screwed several
notches tighter. The success of our mixed
economy and pluralistic society in the next
generation will depend heavily on how those
tensions are managed. In present circumstance,
therefore, economic progress turns
very largely on the policies we pursue, on
what we do through government, and how
we do it. As things now stand, however, we
can hardly be said to be adopting policies so
much as floundering among them, recoiling
from growth and backlashing against the
recoil, for lack of knowledge and for lack of
proper political institutions to use such
knowledge as we have.
The gaps in our knowledge define the job
for economics. Virtually every facet of the
way productivity depends on policy involves
matters of fact still to be established. What
is the elasticity of substitution between energy
and other resources, and how much
will it cost us in future output if we forego
the cheapest mode of increasing energy supplies
in order to provide a greater degree of
protection for environment and people?
What are the full benefits and what are the
full costs of other environmental or safety
measures as now legislated and applied? And
how much could we save if we sought similar
levels of protection more efficiently by
making larger use of market incentives as
regulatory devices? What are the effects of
different levels and-just as importantdifferent
types of taxes and transfers on the
supplies of saving, investment, and risky
enterprise, and on the supply of labor and
the quality of people? What is the full range
of our government expenditure which has
the character of capital formation-and
what are the returns to investment in education
and in research and development? What
would our progress in productivity look like
if we tracked it by a system of national
accounts more relevant to long-term change
in economic welfare than our conventional
national product? The questions go on and
on. These are matters to which, for the most
part, economists have only recently turned.
They are now being attacked with vigor,
which is testimony to the fact that the aggravated
tension between measured productivity
growth and other welfare goals is
eliciting a constructive response. There are
promising beginnings of useful analytical
and empirical work, and these will benefit
from future experience and experiment. At
the same time, our knowledge about this
entire range of questions continues to be
uncertain.
The weakness of our knowledge, moreover,
is matched, probably exceeded, by the
weakness of the political institutions and
procedures through which that knowledge
must be brought to bear. The structure of
government and politics, which served us
well enough during a more individualistic
era and before the population movements of
the last fifty years, has not been successfully
adapted to the new scale and complexity of
public functions. Let me just allude to three
political problems.
One concerns federal budget procedure.
In principle, the budget is the place where
the conflicting claims of special interests
should confront, not only one another, but
also the general interest in economy and in
maintaining a balance between private and
public uses of income. It is also the place
where our concern for increasing welfare by
2IThis, however, does not mean that our present
welfare and training programs are uniformly effective
emollients and remedies for the dislocations and
maladjustments of growth. Nor does it mean that our
present income-support programs may not, in some
instances, have little-understood, deleterious side effects
on family life and individual quality. Nor does it
mean that we now know how to do better.