getting an accurate assessment of national income.
The recent report of The Presidential
Commission on Price Indexes shows that more
widespread failures to make quality adjustments
of goods in price indexes have serious negative
biases for assessing real wage and productivity
growth, and overstate inflation and the social
security and other entitlements that are indexed
to them.
III. Sorting and Stratification
In any market equilibrium, interpersonal differences
in tastes and technologies affect the
locations chosen by buyers and sellers on the
attributes map. Some of these differences are
inexplicable: sometimes there really is no accounting
for different tastes. Others have more
proximate causes, but might just as well be
summarized stochastically. For instance, the
preferences for material goods of a person from
humble origins that subsequently makes lots of
money often seem to differ from those of her
children. Families that are contemplating having
children are likely to prefer larger cars to
smaller ones and suburban to downtown dwelling
units. In the labor market, a person's supply
price for physically demanding or dangerous
work depends on age, physical condition, and
number of dependents, among other things. Different
endowments affect productivities in different
pursuits. Musicians cannot be tone-deaf;
football players tend to be large; while lawyers,
and many economists, have a propensity to talk.
What matters for economic allocations in all
of these cases are the direct manifestations of
tastes. Here, the reservation prices themselves,
not the specific causes that make preferences,
differ case by case. The distributions of bid and
offer functions are sufficient (in the statistical
sense) for ascertaining the demand, supply, and
equilibrium price of each variety. But when
reservation prices are systematically associated
with observable traits of buyers and sellers,
these markets become stratified in many ways.
Stratification and sorting are ubiquitous in spatial
equilibrium and have many interesting consequences.
Neighborhood, bandwagon, status,
and other social externalities are often invoked
to account for stratification, but most stratification
occurs without them.
Sorting by income is one of the most important
forms of stratification in goods, land, and
labor markets. As noted above, people who buy
high-quality goods, and live in better residences
and neighborhoods tend to be richer than other
people. Similarly, high-wage people use their
higher earning capacity to purchase more job
amenities and better working conditions. Stratification
of job quality by the skill characteristics
of workers can make it difficult to estimate
equalizing wage differences for the implicit attributes
of jobs. Sometimes the data on job and
worker characteristics are so colinear that the
ceteris paribus conditions required for identifying
taste parameters alone are overwhelmed by
income stratification and cannot be observed in
the data. Yet it is incorrect to take this as evidence
of failure of the equalizing or compensation
principle in the labor market.
Stratification and colinearity is itself an implication
of the economic theory of preferences
when income effects are important. High-wage
jobs generally are the good jobs, not the bad
ones. They are staffed by skillful workers
whose higher incomes make job amenities more
valuable and who buy more of them. There is no
logical contradiction here. The identifying restrictions
for backing out implicit valuations in
the data just are not satisfied. After all, sometimes
there is not the right kind of variation in
the data to estimate a conventional demand
curve, but that does not imply that a demand
curve does not exist. These difficulties are less
often encountered in imputing implicit prices of
characteristics from goods and land market
prices. Prices and attributes of goods and land
are almost always measured independently of
the characteristics of buyers and sellers. Of
course many aspects of product attributes may
be highly correlated, making it difficult to extract
the value of any single one of them. The
stratification problem more often arises in labor
markets, because observed wages always reflect
the total bundle of both job and workerproductivity
attributes. The correlation between
them can be too large to separate the components.
In sum, potential for stratification places
limits on the empirical applicability of the hedonic
method. Sometimes it cannot be used, but
the test is always empirical.
Colinearity affects the precision with which
effects can be estimated, but sometimes there is
bias in estimating the importance of equalizing