THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
system that is less than fully funded will have less
correlation with the returns on private retirement
savings, as it adjusts benefits in response
to the growth of tax revenues as well as the
returns on whatever assets are held.80 This comparison
holds even with initial benefits fully
automatically adjusted for the actuarial positionreturns
on assets and the growth of taxable earnings
are only partially correlated. Thus portfolio
diversification considerations suggest an advantage
to having (at least) some underfunding in
Social Security to complement private savings.
This diversification advantage comes with
the redistribution to earlier cohorts that is inherent
in a less than fully funded system.81 Thus
one can readily argue for a Pareto gain (ex ante)
from moving from a fully funded system to a
partially funded system with the risk associated
with the incomplete funding falling on benefits.
82 Note that the reverse argument does not
work-just adding funding to an unfunded system
that provides all of retirement benefits will
not generate a Pareto improvement. The gain
from diversification plays out over time, while
the redistribution required to build up funding
hurts the oldest cohorts who provide the funding
and are affected by the diversification argument
very little or not at all.83 Thus the diversification
income issues in that some reform proposals have been
packaged with increased tax incentives for individual retire-
ment savings. The debate has not included the possibility of
a mandatory widening of employer-provided retirement in-
come (with a government-provided default) along the lines
of the recent reform in Australia and earlier discussion in the
United States (President's Commission on Pension Policy,
1981). The diversity in private savings is also relevant for
considering the right size for mandated benefit provision.
80 For example, with an NDC system, the notional assets
in an account earn a notional rate of return that might be set
to equal the growth rate of the wage bill (if other factors are
not too strong). Then, one can consider the correlation
between the return on assets and the growth rate of the wage
bill over different time horizons. Since the internal rate of
return in a pay-as-you-go system is related to the timing of
tax payments and benefits as well as the growth rate of the
wage bill, a more complicated correlation could be exam-
ined.
81 In principle, diversification could also be accom-
plished by swaps of different tax revenues.
82 Throughout this address, I have assumed that the
interest rate is above the growth of wages, so that the
economy is not on the wrong side of the golden-rule level of
capital.
83 This logic is clear in a two-period model. With more
periods and externalities, one might find a complex way to
argument by itself does not lead to the possibility
of a Pareto gain from adding funding to an
unfunded system, just from reducing funding of
a fully funded defined contribution system.
The comparison above assumed all of the
response in the unfunded system occurred in
benefits. By having some of the response to
aggregate shocks fall on taxes, a less than fully
funded system is capable of doing additional
risk sharing across generations that does not
occur with a fully funded defined contribution
system (Douglas Gale, 1990). Of course how
good a job Congress does in adapting such a
system (whether done automatically or by repeated
legislation) is a further issue that must be
recognized. Thus, the current system provides
insurance for individual earnings risk through
the progressive benefit formula and the retirement
test and provides insurance for aggregate
earnings risk through the defined benefit structure
with less than full funding.
My broad conclusion here is that the absence
of a complete specification of Social Security is
not by itself an argument that there is anything
wrong with our current approach.
VII. Concluding Remarks
Occasionally, I run into people who believe
that no one in his right mind would design a
retirement income system like the one we have.
Some of the details do seem far from satisfactory
to me. However, looking at the big picture,
this structure makes sense. Mandated savings
makes sense if you think that many workers
would not provide themselves a reasonable replacement
rate. This is not just an issue of
avoiding poverty, but one that extends quite far
up the income distribution. Mandating annuitization
makes sense if you think that workers do
not adequately understand the value of annuities.
Protection of spouses and children makes
sense if you think that many workers would not
do that adequately. Relating benefits to a measure
of lifetime earnings surely makes sense. A
progressive benefit formula makes sense to provide
higher replacement rates for lower earners,
in order to supplement annual income taxation
benefit everyone, taking advantage of the externalities to
offset the payment for funding. But I have not seen anyone
show such a possibility.
MARCH 2004
22