ing people in the field, plus some of the more
promising recent Ph.D.s. There were 46 re-
spondents (response rate 88 percent). The the-
orists were also leaders in the field; I was
assisted in selecting them by two eminent the-
orists." There were 44 respondents (response
rate 63 percent). The practicing physicians
were reached through my personal contacts,
and include colleagues and friends of those
contacts. Nearly all are in private practice, not
teaching, research, or administration. They are
located on both the east and west coasts in
small towns and large cities. The practice set-
tings vary from solo to a group of over 100
physicians, and in organizational form from
traditional fee-for-service to capitation. They
include generalists, surgical specialists, and
nonsurgical specialists. There were 42 physi-
cian respondents (response rate 89 percent).
The participants were asked to indicate
whether they agree or disagree with each of 20
relatively short statements; they were also
given the option of answering "no opinion."
Ten percent of the health economists' replies
were "no opinion"; the theorists used that op-
tion 19 percent of the time, and the physicians
11 percent. Participants were also invited to
qualify any of their replies by jotting com-
ments on the back of the survey. The percent-
age of replies that were qualified was 8, 5, and
3 for the health economists, theorists, and phy-
sicians, respectively. Participants were told to
assume that the statements refer to the United
States in 1995, other things held constant. For
statements with more than one part, "agree"
would indicate that the respondent agreed with
all parts of the statement. The order of the
questions was determined randomly, and re-
spondents were guaranteed anonymity.
Three experts24 from three different univer-
sities who were not participants in the survey
were asked to identify which of the 20 ques-
tions were relatively value-free ("positive"
questions) and which had substantial value as-
pects ("policy-value" questions). Their in-
dependent replies were almost unanimous in
identifying seven of the questions as "posi-
tive," and thirteen as "policy-value." Table 1
shows the percent agreeing for each question,
with the two types of questions grouped sep-
arately. Question numbers refer to the ordering
of the questions in the survey. The policy-
value questions are presented in three groups:
four that pertain directly to national health in-
surance, three that pertain directly to health
insurance company underwriting, and all oth-
ers. Questions for which the percentage agree-
ing differs significantly from a 50-50 split (by
a chi-square test) are identified with asterisks.
We see in Table 1 that the degree of con-
sensus on positive questions among health
economists is extremely high.25 In six of the
seven cases the hypothesis that the observed
split differs from a 50-50 split simply by
chance is rejected with p < 0.01 and the sev-
enth with p < 0.05. There is also a high degree
of consensus among economic theorists, but
for two of the questions (12 and 13) the ma-
jority of theorists gave replies opposite to
the majority of health economists. Consensus
among the physicians on the positive questions
was more rare. In no case did the split differ
from 50-50 with p < 0.01, and in only three
cases was the split significant at p < 0.05. For
one question (4) the majority of physicians
gave replies opposite to the majority of health
economists.26
When we turn to the policy-value questions,
agreement among the health economists drops
sharply. For example, in replies to the four ques-
tions dealing with support for national health in-
surance, the health economists never depart
significantly from a 50-50 split. On question 8,