sought to maintain employment that was any
lower would result in permanently decreasing
inflation. Fiscal/monetary mixes that yield dif-
ferent levels of long-term (steady) inflation will
thus be neutral in their effects on long-term
unemployment.
D. Rational Expectations
According to Rational Expectations Theory,
a systematic response of monetary policy to the
business cycle will have no effect on the stabil-
ity of the macroeconomy.10 Wage and price
setters will foresee the systematic component of
the money supply; they will raise or lower
prices and wages exactly proportionally, and
thereby neutralize its effect on demand.
The stability of the economy is thus neutral
with respect to the systematic reaction of mon-
etary policy to the business cycle.
E. Ricardian Equivalence
According to Ricardian Equivalence, under
somewhat special conditions, a representative
consumer who receives a lump-sum intergen-
erational transfer (for example, in the form of a
social security payment) will not spend a single
dime extra." Instead, she will pass on the whole
extra income, dollar-for-dollar, to her heirs,
who will have to pay the higher tax bills nec-
essary to retire the increased debt incurred in
funding the transfer to the previous generation.
The transfer is neutral in its effect on current
consumption.
III. The Missing Motivation: Norms'2
Each of the neutralities is based on the as-
sumption that the respective decision makers
are utility maximizers. But in each case the
utility functions of the decision makers have  been very narrowly described. They depend
only on real outcomes. For example, in the
consumption-neutrality models, utility depends
on consumption and leisure; in Modigliani-
Miller, it depends only on the discounted real
return to shareholders.
But as early as the beginning of the twentieth
century, Vilfredo Pareto pointed out that such
characterizations of utility missed important as-
pects of motivation.13 According to Pareto, peo-
ple typically have opinions as to how they
should, or how they should not, behave. They
also have views regarding how others should, or
should not, behave. Such views are called
norms, and they may be individual14 as well as
social. The role of norms can be easily repre-
sented in people's preferences by modifying the
utility function to include losses in utility inso-
far as they, or others, fail to live up to their  standards.
Sociology has a further concept that gives an
easy and natural way to add those norms to the
utility function. Sociologists say that people
have an ideal for how they should or should not
behave. Furthermore, that ideal is often concep-
tualized in terms of the behavior of someone
they know, or some exemplar whom they do not
know. The standard utility function is then mod-
ified by adding a loss in utility, dependent on
the distance of behavior from that ideal.
Religion and religious identity give us a good
example of such norms. Consider the Gospels.
They are the most sacred texts of Christianity.
What do they describe? The life of Christ. How
should a Christian behave? "His life and con-
versation ought to be worthy of the Gospel of
Christ [emphasis added]."'" How is a good
Christian supposed to feel when she has not
lived up to her conception of that ideal?  Ashamed.16