anything people were working with numerically
15 years ago, and without the method developed
in Krusell and Smith (1998) it would not have
been possible to work out the predictions of this
model. A key simplification comes from the fact
that the impact on any one family of the shocks
that hit others has to work through two prices,
the real wage and the rental price of capital.
These prices in turn depend only on the total
stock of capital, regardless of the way it is
distributed, and total employment, regardless of
who has a job and who does not. By exploiting
these features, solutions can be calculated using
an iterative procedure that works like a dream:
For determining the behavior of aggregates,
they discovered, realistically modeled household
heterogeneity just does not matter very
much.
For individual behavior and welfare, of
course, heterogeneity is everything. In the
thought-experiments that Krusell and Smith run
with their model, removal of the business cycle
is defined to be equivalent to setting the aggregate
productivity shock equal to a constant. It is
important to be clear on what the effect of such
a change would be on the behavior of the employment
shocks to which individuals are subject,
but the magical character of the experiment
makes it hard to know how this question is best
resolved. I will describe what Krusell and Smith
did, and deal with some other possibilities later on.
Suppose that a shock y = az + - affects an
individual's behavior, where z is the aggregate
shock and e is idiosyncratic. We project the
individual shock on the aggregate, e = cz + 7J,
where the residual qr is uncorrelated with z, and
then think of an ideal stabilization policy as one
that replaces
y = az + e = (a + c)z + r1
with
y = (a + c)E(z) + *1.
Not only is the direct effect of the productivity
shock z removed but also the indirect effects of
z on the individual employment shocks e.18 In

this particular application, removing the variance
of the aggregate shock is estimated to
reduce the standard deviation of the individual
employment shocks by 16 percent.19
The first such thought-experiment Krusell
and Smith describe involves a comparison between
the expected utility drawn from the
steady state of the economy with aggregate
shocks and the expected utility from the steady
state of the economy with aggregate shocks and
their indirect effects removed in the way I have
just described. The welfare gain from eliminating
cycles in this sense turns out to be negative!
In a model, like this one, in which markets for
risk pooling are incomplete, people will engage
in precautionary savings, overaccumulating
capital in the effort to self-insure. This implies
larger average consumption in the more risky
economy. Of course, there are costs to accumulating
the higher capital stock, but these costs are
not fully counted in a steady-state comparison.
In any case, as Krusell and Smith emphasize,
there is nothing really distributional about a
steady-state comparison: Every infinitely lived
dynasty is assigned a place in the wealth distribution
at random, and no one of them can be
identified as permanently rich or poor. The
whole motivation of the paper is to focus on the
situation of people described as "hand-to-mouth
consumers," but a steady-state comparison
misses them. This observation motivates a second
thought-experiment-one with much more
complicated dynamics than the first-in which
an economy is permitted to reach its steadystate
wealth distribution with realistic aggregate
shocks, and then is relieved of aggregate risk.
The full transition to a new steady state is then
worked out and taken into account in the utility
comparisons. In this experiment, we can identify
individuals as "rich" or "poor" by their position
in the initial wealth distribution, and discuss
the effects of risk removal category by category.
The average welfare gain in this second experiment
is about 0.1 of 1 percent of consumption,
about twice the estimate in Section II of
this paper. (Krusell and Smith also assume log
utility.) But this figure masks a lot of diversity.
Low wealth, unemployed people-people who