Even a transition in which the initial personal
retirement account deposits are financed wholly
by government borrowing could eventually
raise national saving and the present value of
future consumption. Financing the initial deposit
to personal retirement accounts by government
borrowing would have no immediate
direct effect on national saving because the increased
budget deficit would be offset by the
deposit of those funds into the personal retirement
accounts. Over time, the availability of the
PRA annuities could permit reducing the payas-
you-go benefits (relative to those projected in
current law) without lowering total retirement
income. This reduction in the pay-as-you-go
benefits would mean that the annual rise in the
budget deficit would be less than the amount
transferred to the PRAs. That difference would
be an increase in national saving.22
I turn next to the issue of the administrative
cost of PRAs. Some critics of PRAs argue that
the administrative costs of a PRA program
could offset all of their higher return relative to
the pay-as-you-go system. Although there have
been bad cost experiences in some countries,
this certainly need not be so. Sweden's recent
PRA program involves administrative costs
equal to between 30 and 100 basis points of the
assets, an amount that will come down further
as the total assets grow, since the administrative
costs depend on the number of transactions and
not on the value of the assets. TIAA-CREF
operates an individual account system with a
variable annuity for a charge of only 37 basis
points.23
The issue of risk is an important consideration
in both the pay-as-you-go and investment-based
systems. Although pay-as-you-go programs do
not have asset price risk, they have the political
risk that future taxpayers may not be willing to  raise taxes when demographic or economic
changes would make it necessary to do so in order
to finance promised benefits. The United States
enacted benefit cuts in 1983 by increasing the age
for full benefits. Many Latin American countries
cut cash benefits in the 1980s and 1990s. More
recently, Germany, Italy, and Japan have announced
or enacted reductions in state pension
benefits.24 Perhaps the most reliable way to avoid
future legislation that causes an unexpected reduction
in retirement income is to develop a mixed
system that does not require a future rise in the
payroll tax rate.
The issue of asset price risk is more complex.
On the basis of a substantial amount of research,
I believe that a suitable mixed system that combines
tax-financed pay-as-you-go benefits with
investment-based PRA annuities can satisfy
three conditions: a substantially lower longterm
cost of financing retirement income than
the tax projected for the pay-as-you-go system;
a higher expected level of benefits from the
combination of pay-as-you-go and the PRA annuities;
and a very low probability that the actual
level of combined benefits will be less than
the pay-as-you-go benefits projected in current
law.25 The low risk could be achieved by a
combination of three things: the floor on retirement
income provided by the pay-as-you-go
benefits in the mixed system, restrictions on the
investments that can be made in the PRAs, and
explicit guarantees provided by either the government
or the private market. Because individuals
differ in their risk preferences, the solution
that can best reflect those different preferences
may be the availability of a variety of alternative
guarantees from the private organizations
that manage the PRAs and PRA annuities (Feldstein,
2005a).
I turn, finally, to the issue of the distributional
effect of the shift from our pay-as-you-go system
to a mixed system. I have already discussed
the evidence that the current Social Security
system does very little redistribution and leaves
some 10 percent of seniors with incomes below
the poverty line. Women who were never married,
widows, and particularly those who were
widowed or divorced at a relatively early age  22 Feldstein and Liebman (2002a, section 7.1.3) used an
overlapping generation model to show how such a debt  financed transition could raise the present value of con-  sumption. The rise in saving does not happen in the first  period but begins after that. The debt service on the initial  borrowing cannot be financed by additional borrowing  alone; the growth of the debt must be less than the growth  of the economy.  23 See Shoven (2000) for several discussions of admin-  istrative issues. The chapter by Fred T. Goldberg, Jr., and  Michael J. Graetz (2000) shows how administrative costs  can be reduced while maintaining the individual account
structure.  24 See John McHale (2001) for more evidence on this
point. 25 See Feldstein (2005a, 2005b) for a more extensive
discussion of the risk issue.