* A realistic norm will make income and employment
dependent on systematic monetary
policy, and thus violate rational expectations
theory; and

* A realistic norm will make current consumption
dependent on the current generation's
social security receipts, in violation of Ricardian
equivalence.

Additionally, insofar as the behavior assumed
by the early Keynesians differed from the behavior
that produces the neutralities, there is
likely to be a bias in favor of the Keynesians.
The Keynesians based their models on their
observation of motivations, rather than on abstract
derivations. If there is a difference between
real behavior and behavior derived from
abstract preferences, New Classical economics
has no way to pick up those differences. In
contrast, models with norms based on observation
will systematically incorporate such behavior-
although, of course, as with any method,
there is the possibility for error.
Inclusion of the "missing motivations in macroeconomics"
then combines the observations
of the Keynesians with the intentionality of
economic decisions in New Classical economics.
Such a synthesis yields the best of the two
approaches.

Two Disclaimers.--Before beginning in earnest,
let me offer two brief disclaimers. First,
none of the behavior revealing of the norms that
are introduced in this lecture will be new. On
the contrary, I have purposefully chosen phenomena
that have been emphasized since The
General Theory by macroeconomists who have
followed Keynes in voicing their continuing
doubts about classical interpretations of macroeconomic
behavior.

Second, this lecture will discuss different
norms that respectively correspond to the five
neutralities. I shall assume that these norms are
exogenous. Such assumptions of exogeneity are
standard in economic analysis. In a given problem
in a given time frame, some terms are
assumed constant, while others are allowed to
vary. I ask you to withhold your doubts regarding
whether such exogeneity is a correct assumption
or not. The incorporation of such
endogeneity is the next step-not the first
step-in the study of the effect of norms on
macroeconomics, especially since such endoge-
neity may sometimes dampen, but will rarely
nullify, the conclusions of this lecture.
II. The Five Neutrality Results
For clarity, this section will now give an
overview of each of the five neutrality results.
A. Dependence of Consumption on Wealth,
Not Income

Standard theory tells us that, under only
somewhat special conditions, consumption depends
on wealth, which is the value of current
assets plus the discounted value of future earnings.
7 Thus there is no tendency for people to
make their expenditures conform to the pattern
of their income receipts (as long as their wealth
is given).

Changes in the pattern of current income that
leave overall wealth constant are neutral in their
effects on current consumption.
B. The Modigliani-Miller Theorem
One version of the Modigliani-Miller Theorem
says that a firm's investment strategy is
totally independent of its liquidity position.8
Thus, for example, a corporation with an unexpected
windfall will not spend any additional
investment dollars. Instead, it will pass the
windfall on to shareholders or seek other financial
investments, since it will make only those
investments whose risk-adjusted rate of return
exceeds the rate of return on capital.
Changes in the firm's finances will thus be
neutral in their effect on current investment.
C. Natural Rate Theory

According to Natural Rate Theory, there is
some single rate of unemployment that is the
only level that could be permanently maintained
without ever-increasing inflation or everincreasing
deflation.9 A fiscal/monetary policy
mix that sought to maintain employment that
was any higher would result in permanently
increasing inflation. A fiscal/monetary mix that