Stochastic errors in forecasting could generate
temporary wage "errors" and departures
of employment from its natural rate. But
nominal wages would fundamentally be
flexible.
A rational expectations approach to the
determination of the aggregate nominal wage
and price level, however, cannot simply be
carried over into a world of sticky relative
wages. There are several reasons why this is
so. In the first place, in the new classical
model it is not the expectational element
that generates aggregate nominal wage flexibility.
Rather, a prompt response of aggregate
nominal wages to nominal shocks is
guaranteed by the perfect ex ante flexibility
of relative wages in auction markets. In these
models a downward nominal demand shock
generates a prompt and "neutral" change in
the path of nominal wages precisely because
of individual workers' presumed willingness
to underbid wages, shading their bids and
offers in the face of excess supplies, to the
point where markets are cleared. In the auction-
market model, workers or groups of
workers are willing to accept lower wages in
the face of excess supply even when errors in
expectations lead them to misperceive the
entire wage cut as a relative one. In the event
of such misperceptions, some labor supply is
withdrawn but nominal wages still fall. And
as soon as the misperception is corrected,
wages quickly fall by the remaining amount
necessary to eliminate excess labor supply
and clear labor markets. In the world of
implicit contracts I have described earlier,
however, the absence of substantial relative
wage flexibility eliminates this basis for
prompt nominal wage flexibility.
In the absence of auction markets with
their relative wage flexibility, the achievement
of aggregate nominal wage flexibility
becomes a prisoner's dilemma problem. But,
since wages are not completely rigid under
implicit contracts, it is not possible that individual
firms and their workers forecast the
ultimate equilibrium response of average
wages to nominal shocks, promptly adjust
their own wages to it and thereby solve the
prisoner's dilemma in favor of nominal wage
flexibility? I think not. Two key features of
implicit contracts interact with one central
feature of rational forecasts to reduce sharply
the feasibility of commonly shared expectations
about the equilibrium W as a surrogate
for Arrow-Debreu contingent claims contracts.
First, firms are wage setters, not wage
takers; second, frequent haggling over wage
changes is very costly to the development of
mutually beneficial long-term relationships
between workers and firms; and third, forecasts
of equilibrium wage and price levels are
subject to substantial stochastic error and
forecast outcomes are likely to be widely
distributed over the population of wage-setting
firms.
In a world of auction markets, the fact
that forecasts of individual agents are widely
distributed around the "true" mean is for
most purposes irrelevant. In his seminal
article (1961), John Muth pointed out that
cross-sectional differences in expectations
posed no problem for the theory because
their aggregate effect would be negligible so
long as deviations from the rational forecast
by individual firms were not strongly correlated
with each other. In auction markets,
specific prices or wages are not determined
by individual forecasts. But, in a world of
implicit contracts with firms as wage setters,
they would be. The dispersion of individual
forecasts concerning the equilibrium nominal
wage W, and therefore the dispersion of individual
wage decisions, would often be a wide
one. Robert Lucas' words about the role of
rational expectations in shaping the actions
of economic agents are relevant in this regard:

Neither will [rational expectations] be
applicable in situations in which one
cannot guess which, if any, observable
frequencies are relevant: situations
which Knight called 'uncertainty'. It
will most likely be useful in situations
in which the probabilities of interest
concern a fairly well defined recurrent
event, situations of 'risk' in Knight's
terminology. [1977, p. 15]
Changes in the path of nominal wages, however,
have not simply, or even primarily,
been driven by recurrent patterns of endogenous