in-the-making, and conservation and de-
velopment measures to limit dependence
on foreign raw materials cartels. In other
words, it is a call for better planning,
better data, and faster conversion of
knowledge into policy.
Another criterion of economists' re-
sponses to inflationary shocks is how
quickly they adapted (read, "disaggre-
gated") their macromodels, large and
small, to incorporate new supply and price
parameters that had previously been
judged of second or third order importance
and hence relegated to Marshall's ceteris
paribus pound. Some of the mongrel pups
impounded there turned out to be full
blooded huskies, for example, food prices,
the exchange value of the dollar, oil and
other raw material supplies and prices. At
first most economists were slow and the big
models sluggish in their responses. After
all, for two decades prices had moved in
tandem with wages, with a year-by-year
percentage-point differential of 23+ 1. So
most models relied on wage trends, with
some adjustment for productivity and
capacity behavior, to give them a fix on
price trends. Their eyes were on labor
market indicators rather than commodity
supplies, exchange rates, and the like.
After some initial delays, the model build-
ers scrambled to disaggregate, to build
microelements into their macromodels.
For example, DRI now has good stage-of-
processing models that absorb the impacts
of food and energy explosions. Price elas-
ticities are being built into the macro-
models to reflect the impact of massive
relative price changes on the macrodimen-
sions of the economy.
The whole experience reminds us of the
role and limits of econometric forecasting
models. First, the combination of com-
puters, mathematics, and econometrics
cannot produce the miracles that the un-
initiated may expect of them-there is no
way of replicating reality with its 3 million
equations, all of them non-linear. Second,
their indispensable function is to bring us
closer to reality and help the mind manage
the previously unmanageable-they per-
mit us to release vastly more animals from
the ceteris paribus pound than we could
manage without these tools. Third, they
have to be constantly adjusted to plug in
common sense, adjust the length of the
lags, and bring in new dimensions of the
problem. Else, they will lock out things
that a more judgmental approach would
include, and will fail to respond quickly to
changes in order of importance.
So the inflation-shock experience has
brought home the need not just to watch
supply but to watch all the pieces lest the
model prevail over the mind, rather than
having the model help the mind prevail
over matter. The macro-stalactites have
to reach toward the micro-stalagmites, and
vice versa. I hope that metaphor is not a
portent of the pace at which the advance
toward macro-micro fusion will proceed.
Economists who use judgmental models
have shown us how to be the master
rather than the slave of the computer. A
case in point was the early analysis (es-
pecially by George Perry) of the macro-
impact of the oil price increases. A year
ago, his work had already brought out the
oil paradox-the inflation of costs and
hence prices, leading to a deflation of ag-
gregate demand-and had provided some
estimates of both. The insight that some
$15 to $20 billion of consumer purchasing
power would be siphoned off into the
hands of oil producers and royalty col-
lectors without any early return to the
economy in the form of demand for im-
ports or investment goods had important
implications for demand-management pol-
icy-implications that were ignored until
severe recession was full upon us.7