retirement, unemployment, and health care of the
retired population are more appropriate than payas-
you-go programs, means-tested programs, or a
policy of doing nothing.

There is an important political economy
reason for economists to work on improving
the design of social insurance programs rather
than advocating means-tested programs for
unemployment and old age. Elected governments
will inevitably seek to create universal
benefits to capture political support from the
largest possible majority of voters. Otto von
Bismark introduced social insurance in Prussia
in 1881 in an attempt to win support for
his conservative government and to fend off
the appeal of the nascent social democrats.
Even if it were economically desirable to do
so, economists could not prevent the spread of
social insurance by arguing that means-tested
programs would be more efficient. If economists
don't analyze the effects of social insurance
programs and recommend rules that
reflect good economics, the political process
will inevitably produce inferior programs.
III. Principles of Social Insurance
Accepting that there is a reason for mandatory
social insurance programs does not imply the appropriateness
of the programs that we have inherited
from the past. Today's Social Security and
unemployment insurance were enacted nearly 70
years ago. Economic conditions, administrative
technologies, and assumptions about economic
behavior have all changed dramatically since then.
And yet during these past 70 years, the key social
insurance programs have expanded without fundamental
change.

Before I consider some of the specific ways
in which our basic social insurance programs
can be reformed and strengthened, I want to
discuss broader principles that can help us to
think about each of the specific programs. I'll
begin with three fundamental political principles
and then turn to four economic principles.
A. Three Political Principles
Political principles involve value judgments
to a greater extent than the economic principles
to which I will turn later. I can explain the
political principles that shape my view about
appropriate reforms but I cannot prove that they
should determine policy. You may or may not
agree with them. Of course, you might agree
with me about specific reforms even if you
reject some or all of these principles.
Permitting Individual Choice.-Individuals
differ in their preferences. We do not all have
the same risk aversion, the same time preference,
the same relative taste for goods and leisure.
Letting individuals choose among options
in a way that reflects their individual preferences
should be an important aspect of social
insurance design. For Milton Friedman, such
freedom to choose is paramount. For me, it is
important but not decisive. In cases where
asymmetric information creates serious efficiency
problems, I might restrict that choice.
But I prefer to allow as much choice as possible.
I think that allowing individuals to make their
own choices is morally correct and generally
improves individual, and therefore social,
well-being.

But allowing choice means that programs
should be designed so that choice enhances
economic efficiency rather than creating deadweight
losses. A good example of such a program
redesign was the Social Security reform
that introduced the actuarial adjustment for
early and delayed retirement in a way that, in
principle, will allow individuals to decide when
they will start collecting benefits without changing
the actuarial present value of their benefits.5
Creating Program Transparency.--Social
insurance programs involve complex rules
about the benefits to be received, the taxes to be
paid, and the link, if any, between them. Who
among you is confident about even the most
basic Social Security rules that determine benefits
at retirement? If you are a man, what
benefit would your wife receive if she collects
on her own rather than as your spouse? How
would that change if she earned more or worked
another year? If she decides to retire at age 62
rather than 65? I'm told that there are more than
2500 separate rules in the Social Security
handbook.

The complexity of the rules weakens the perceived
link between the payroll taxes paid and
SThis adjustment will provide actuarially equivalent
benefits with a 3 percent real rate of return.