likely, unless the relationship between inventions
and the number of patents applied
for has been changing.
The suspicion that the relationship between
the number of patents and the number
of inventions (weighted by their relative
economic importance) has been changing is
not new. Schmookler (1966) stops most of
his analysis with pre-World War II data,
believing that the meaning of the patent
statistics changed at that time. What needs
to be reconciled in the data is the sharp
contrast between the rapidly growing R&D
series during 1953-1968 (and earlier) and
the essentially flat patent series. There are a
number of not mutually exclusive possibilities
here:
(i) The fast-growing R&D expenditures,
fueled by the new global opportunities
that opened up in the post-World War
II period, were being invested in face
of rapidly diminishing returns.
(ii) Some of the observed growth in R&D
could be spurious, the result of reclassification
of informal technological activities
into formal R&D under the
pressure of tax accountants, publicrelations
experts, and R&D tax credits.
(iii) The rise of formal R&D-based invention
crowded out smaller, less valuable
individual-inventor-based patents, while
the rise in the cost of patenting (in
terms of the time costs of dealing with
the patent system) and the more recent
sharp rise in fees may have selected out
a large number of potentially low-valued
patents. Given the evidence that
the value distribution of inventions and
patents is extremely skewed, with only
a small fraction having a high present
value, such a crowding out could raise
average values significantly, though the
required rate is rather on the high
side.12
It is also likely that the threshold for what
is patentable has risen, given the large influx
of foreign patent applications into the
U.S. system all impinging on a relatively
slow-growing and budget-constrained patent
office.'3 On the other hand, the legal
status of patents in the United States has
improved significantly with the creation of a
special patents court, driving up the expected
private value of a patent. Given the
presence of so many opposing forces, there
is no compelling need to reply on the
exhaustion-of-inventive-opportunities hypothesis,
especially since patents-to-R&D
ratios were falling much more drastically
during the "good times" of the past than
recently.14 Moreover, if we do take these
numbers seriously, then good news is just
around the corner: domestic patent applications
have risen sharply in the last five years
(see Fig. 5), implying a potential resurgence
in the rate of technological change. This
leaves us, however, more or less where we
started, with the productivity slowdown
largely unexplained.
12There is scattered evidence on the rising "quality"
of patents from patent renewal data (see Mark
Schankerman and Ariel Pakes, 1986; Pakes and Margaret
Simpson, 1989) and from the rising number of
claims per patent (see X. Tong and J. D. Frame, 1992).
The latter, for example, rose at about 2.5 percent per
year between 1970 and 1990. That is about right for
this period but far too low for the 6+ percent earlier.
On the other hand, Cabellero and Jaffe (1993), using
citation data, find that the average "size" of a patent
did not grow during the last 20 years.
13There is some evidence that such crowding-out
may have occurred. Between 1966-1969 and 1981-1985
the "yield ratio" for domestic patent applications in
terms of grants received fell by about 15 percent (from
0.68 to 0.58) before recovering somewhat in the late
1980's (to 0.62). See Griliches (1990) for a survey of
these issues and citations to the relevant literature.
'A similar story is also told by other scattered
invention "output" indicators. In their study of innovations
in the chemical, textile, and machinery-tools industries,
Baily and Chakrabarti (1988) found a decline
in the number of innovations in the 1970's in two out
of these three industries, and some recovery thereafter.
Similar patterns were observed in a study of British
industrial innovations (see the figure in Gerhard
Mensch et al. [1991]). In both cases the timing is not
right for an explanation of the slowdown in the 1970's.
The impact on productivity is too fast. Rather, it is
likely to reflect the impact of the slowdown in the
growth of aggregate demand and the recessions of the
1970's. In both cases there is an upturn in the 1980's.