In leading centers of instruction faculty
responsibility is either secure or increasingly
so. But in place of the old censorship
has come a new despotism. That consists in
defining scientific excellence as whatever is
closest in belief and method to the
scholarly tendency of the people who are
already there. This is a pervasive and
oppressive thing not the less dangerous for
being, in the frequent case, both selfrighteous
and unconscious.

But there are problems even with this
control. Neoclassical or neo-Keynesian
economics, though providing unlimited opportunity
for demanding refinement, has
a decisive flaw. It offers no useful handle
for grasping the economic problems that
now beset the modern society. And these
problems are obtrusive-they will not lie
down and die as a favor to our profession.
No arrangement for the perpetuation of
thought is secure if that thought does not
make contact with the problems that it is
presumed to solve.

I will not omit this evening to mention
the failures of neoclassical theory. But I
want also to urge the means by which we
can reassociate ourselves with reality.
Some of this will summarize past argument,
more a book that is presently to be
published. At this stage even the most conservative
among my listeners will be reassured.
To speak well of one's own published
and unpublished writing, whatever
one's other aberrations, is strongly in our
professional tradition.

I

The most commonplace features of neoclassical
and neo-Keynesian economics are
the assumptions by which power, and
therewith political content, is removed
from the subject. The business firm is subordinate
to the instruction of the market
and, thereby, to the individual or household.
The state is subordinate to the instruction
of the citizen. There are exceptions
but these are to the general and controlling
rule, and it is firmly on the rule
that neoclassical theory is positione(l. If
the business firm is subordinate to the
market--if that is its master--then it does
not have power to deploy in the economy
save as this is in the service of the market
and the consumer. And the winning of
action to influence or rig the behavior of
markets apart, it cannot bring power to
bear on the state for there the citizen is in
charge.

The decisive weakness in neoclassical
and neo-Keynesian economics is not the
error in the assumptions by which it elides
the problem of power. The capacity for
erroneous belief is very great, especially
where it coincides with convenience.
Rather in eliding power--in making economics
a nonpolitical subject---neoclassical
theory, by the same process, destroys
its relation with the real world. The problems
of this world, moreover, are increasing,
both in number and in the depth of their
social affliction. In consequence neoclassical
and neo-Keynesian economics is relegating
its players to the social sidelines
where they either call no plays or urge the
wrong ones.

Specifically the exclusion of power and
the resulting political content from economics
causes it to foretell only two intrinsic
and important economic problems.
One of these is the microeconomic problem
of market imperfection-more specifically
of monopoly or oligopoly in product or
factor markets leading to aberration in
resource and income distribution. The
other is the macroeconomic problem of unemployment
or inflation-of a deficiency
or excess in the aggregate demand for
goods and services, including that associated
with monetary effects. And on both
problems the failure is dramatic. Neoclassical
economics leads to the wrong
solution of the microeconomic problem
and to no solution of the macroeconomic