retirement health accounts (PRHAs) that finance a
range of Medicare choices.
IV. Unemployment Insurance
Although unemployment insurance is a relatively
small program with total federal and state
outlays in 2003 of $39 billion, it is particularly
important because of its impact on macroeconomic
performance. It is also significant as an
illustration of how reforms have been able to
reduce distortion while retaining protection for
those who need it. Moreover, it is a form of
social insurance where further reforms through
investment-based accounts could achieve substantial
economic gains.
The unemployment insurance program in the
United States was created in 1935 in the depth
of the depression. The program is administered
by the individual states but under federal rules
that substantially restrict the scope of state governments'
actions. Benefits of a typical recipient
are 50 percent of previous earnings and can be
collected for up to six months. The European
unemployment benefit programs are substantially
more generous in both the relative level
and the duration of benefits, with clearly adverse
effects on European unemployment rates.
Thirty years ago, when I began doing research
on unemployment insurance (Feldstein,
1973a, 1973b), there was a general perception
that unemployment benefits were relatively low
and that they had little or no effect on economic
behavior. People were assumed to be unemployed
solely because there was inadequate aggregate
demand. Reformers focused on seeking
increases in the level and duration of benefits to
help those who were unemployed for what were
assumed to be reasons beyond their own control.
We now know that perception was wrong.
Unemployment insurance benefits raise the unemployment
rate in a variety of ways that economists
have now analyzed and measured. But
back in the 1960s and 1970s, the higher unemployment
rates that were actually induced by
unemployment insurance were instead incorrectly
perceived as due to inadequate demand.
When the government tried to reduce this high
structural unemployment with expansionary
monetary and fiscal policies, the result was rising
inflation. Fortunately, this is now better
understood. Monetary policy no longer tries to
reduce structural unemployment. But although  unemployment insurance is therefore no longer
a source of increased inflation, it continues to
raise the rate of unemployment. This is a particularly
serious problem in Europe where unemployment
rates remain close to 10 percent.
The old notion that unemployment benefits
were too low to affect the economy was the
result of a misleading comparison of the average
weekly unemployment benefit and the average
weekly wage. Although the average
benefit was only about 30 percent of the average
wage of all workers, the unemployed had substantially
lower pre-unemployment wages than
the labor force as a whole. Unemployment insurance
benefits actually averaged about 50 percent
of the pre-unemployment income of those
who received benefits, with even higher replacement
rates in states that supplemented the
basic benefit with payments for spouses and
children. But even this substantially understated
the relevant replacement rate because benefits
were not subject to the income and payroll taxes
that were levied on wages. Since the combined
marginal rate of income and payroll tax for the
spouse of a high-earning individual could then
easily exceed 50 percent, the ratio of untaxed UI
benefits to the individual's net-of-tax potential
earnings could exceed 100 percent. For such a
person, it was possible to have a higher net
income by remaining unemployed than by returning
to work.
Even significantly lower benefit replacement
rates could have substantial adverse incentive
effects, as a number of studies eventually
showed. Although macroeconomists came to
recognize that much unemployment was not of
an involuntary Keynesian type but was a productive
search for good job matches, the accumulating
evidence showed that UI benefits were
inducing excessively long periods of searching
in which the gain from the marginal search was
less than the value of the foregone output. For
example, Larry Katz and Bruce Meyer (1990)
showed that the probability that an unemployed
person takes a job rises dramatically in the few
weeks just before their benefits would expire.
Jim Poterba and I (1984) found that the median
value of the reported reservation wage of new
UI recipients was actually higher than the wage
on their previous job, that it was an increasing
function of the UI replacement rate, and that it
came down only very slowly during their spell
of unemployment.