Both software and hardware are essential for
information technology and this is reflected in
the large volume of software expenditures. The
eleventh comprehensive revision of the national
accounts, released by BEA on October 27,
1999, reclassified computer software as invest-
ment.17 Before this important advance, business
expenditures on software were treated as current
outlays, while personal and government expen-
ditures were treated as purchases of nondurable
goods. Software investment is growing rapidly
and is now much more important than invest-
ment in computer hardware.
Robert P. Parker and Grimm (2000) describe
the new estimates of investment in software. BEA
distinguishes among three types of software-
prepackaged, custom, and own-account software.
Prepackaged software is sold or licensed in stan-
dardized form and is delivered in packages or
electronic files downloaded from the Internet.
Custom software is tailored to the specific appli-
cation of the user and is delivered along with
analysis, design, and programming services re-
quired for customization. Own-account software
consists of software created for a specific applica-
tion. However, only price indexes for prepackaged
software hold performance constant.
Parker and Grimm (2000) present a constant
quality price index for prepackaged software,
given in Figure 3. This combines a hedonic
model of prices for business applications soft-
ware and a matched model index for spread-
sheet and word-processing programs developed
by Steven D. Oliner and Daniel E. Sichel
(1994). Prepackaged software prices decline at
more than 10 percent per year over the period
1962-1998. Since 1998 the BEA has relied on a
matched model price index for all prepackaged
software from the PPI; prior to 1998 the PPI
data do not hold quality constant.
BEA's prices for own-account software are
based on programmer wage rates. This implic-
itly assumes no change in the productivity of
computer programmers, even with growing in-
vestment in hardware and software to support
the creation of new software. Custom software