The elasticity of taxable labor income with
respect to the net-of-tax share, i.e., to one minus
the marginal tax rate on labor income, is much
greater than the traditional elasticity of labor
supply as measured by labor force participation
and average hours worked. Estimating this elasticity
is now a subject of very active research
among public finance economists. Although a
wide range of estimates has been produced,
some studies are more reliable than others. I
believe that a conservative estimate is that the
compensated elasticity of taxable income with
respect to the net-of-tax rate is one-half.
Using this elasticity and the 2004 taxable
payroll implies that a rise in the effective marginal
tax rate from 37.7 percent to 44.2 percent
increases the annual deadweight loss by $96
billion, or nearly one percent of GDP.11 Since
the 6.5-percent increase in the marginal tax rate
applies only to taxable labor income (about 40
percent of GDP), the deadweight loss is equal to
about one-third of the incremental tax revenue.
Even this understates the relative size of the
deadweight loss because it ignores the reduction
in the tax base and therefore in the tax revenue
that results from the higher marginal tax. When
that reduction in taxable income is taken into
account, the incremental deadweight loss is
nearly 50 percent of the incremental revenue.12
The true cost per additional dollar of payroll tax
revenue is therefore $1.50.
Note that this is just the deadweight loss or
excess burden-i.e., the pure waste-associated  with the incremental tax. It does not include the
deadweight loss of the existing tax or the direct
burden of the taxes themselves. And it does not
include the deadweight loss caused by the program
distortions.
Although scaling back the rise in future benefits
would reduce the increase in the deadweight
loss, it would also reduce the protection
that Social Security provides to future retirees.
An alternative approach is therefore to redesign
the program so that the increased financing required
for the aging population has less of the
character of a tax.
One way to do that is to strengthen the taxpayers
perception of the link between taxes paid
and future benefits. That is one of the advantages
of shifting from the existing complicated
defined benefit rules to a defined contribution
system, even to a notional defined contribution
system. Although a notional defined contribution
plan would remain a pay-as-you-go system,
it would clearly link each worker's social insurance
tax payment to his or her resulting future  benefits.
A defined contribution system would provide
a tax-benefit link for those groups in the population
that now receive no extra benefits at all in
exchange for their additional taxes. For them,
the Social Security payroll tax is a pure tax just
like the income tax. These include both young
and older workers who are not in the top 35
wage-indexed earning years of their life, the
basis on which Social Security benefits are calculated,
as well as working women who will
eventually claim benefits based on their husbands'
earnings.
Although an unfunded notional defined contribution
system would provide some remedy,
the very low implicit rate of return in an unfunded
system implies that the payroll tax
would retain much of its distorting character. A
pay-as-you-go plan that substitutes a 2-percent
real return for private saving that would otherwise
earn a 5-percent real return is equivalent
over a lifetime of saving and dissaving to a tax
rate of about 75 percent.13  ing distortion is not the elasticity of saving with respect to  the net-of-tax return but the elasticity of future consumption  with respect to that net of tax return; Feldstein (1978b).  Saving is equivalent to expenditure on future consumption.  The relevant elasticity is therefore much larger than the elas-  ticity of saving. If saving does not respond to changes in the net  interest rate, the relevant compensated elasticity is equal to one  minus the marginal propensity to save.  " The formula for the increase in the deadweight loss is  0.5 E (t22 - t12) TLI/(1 - t,) where TLI is taxable labor  income, t2 = 0.442 and t, = 0.377. With TLI equal to 40  percent of GDP or $4.5 trillion and E = 0.5, the implied  increase in the deadweight loss is $96 billion.  12 With a compensated elasticity of 0.5 and an income  effect of 0.15, raising the marginal tax rate from 37.7  percent to 44.2 percent on an initial tax base of $4.5 trillion  reduces taxable income by $199 billion and therefore re-  duces tax revenue by $88 billion. The net tax increase is
thus reduced from $293 billion to $205 billion and the
deadweight loss per dollar of incremental revenue increases  to 46 percent.  13 An individual who can get a real net of tax rate of
return of (say) 5 percent in an individual retirement account  (IRA) or a 401(k) plan converts one dollar saved at age 45  (in the middle of his working life) to $4.32 at age 75 (in the  middle of his retirement). But if the implicit return on a  pay-as-you-go Social Security tax is only 2 percent, the