The early debates over the role of government
in economic life, at least during the
era of industrialization, took the form of a
contest between laissez-faire and thoroughgoing
socialism. In Western Europe and
North America, however, the movement
away from individualism followed a much
less radical course, which John Maynard
Keynes was one of the first to define. His
famous lectures in the mid-1920's on The
End of Laissez-Faire carried the following
passage:
... a time may be coming when we
shall get clearer than we are at present
as to when we are talking about
Capitalism as an efficient or inefficient
technique, and when we are talking
about it as desirable or objectionable
in itself. For my part, I think that
Capitalism, wisely managed, can probably
be made more efficient for attaining
economic ends than any alternative
yet in sight, but that in itself it
is in many ways extremely objectionable.
Our problem is to work out a
social organization which shall be as
efficient as possible without offending
our notions of a satisfactory way of
life. [p. 53, emphasis added]
Keynes, as we can now see, was among
the first writers to form a definite vision of
the kind of system under which we have
come to live during the last half century, the
system we now call the Mixed Economy or
Welfare Capitalism or the Middle Way. Like
the much more individualistic, much less
guided, system that preceded it, the Mixed
Economy developed with the support of a
broad consensus of opinion. That consensus,
however, has now weakened. The
economic role of government is again the
subject of debate, attack, and resistance far
more intense than we have known for decades.
The attack ranges over a wide spectrum.
It questions the scope of government,
the particular measures and policies through
which government exercises its functions,
and the political institutions which shape
the measures and policies employed. A few
voices call on us to move on to a more encompassing
socialism, including the ownership
of industry. Many more call for a drastic
revival of market rule.
We all, I think, sense that we have come
to a very difficult juncture in the development
of our Mixed Economy. How we shall
emerge is still in dim prospect. As in other
illnesses, social crises often are surmounted
and are followed by periods of renewed
stable development. But sometimes not. We,
therefore, ought to think where we are and
what the nature of our troubles is.
I
There is no single, simple way to gather
together all the threads of our present discontent,
and I shall not try. One useful
opening, however, is to consider the pronounced
and worrisome retardation of productivity
growth from which we now suffer.
Productivity growth, I need hardly say, is
the main source of measured per capita
output growth. And per capita output, in
turn, is a central component of economic
welfare as we economists conceive it, many
would say the central component. It is elementary,
however, that per capita output
growth and welfare growth are not the same
thing. National product is not even an adequate
long-term measure of net output relevant
to welfare. It makes inadequate allowance