part of the productivity growth process itself.

And yet, manifestly, there is another side
to the story, the side that is so much to the
fore today. The government's roles as referee
and as mitigator of the costs of growth- as
well as instrument for pursuing welfare goals
supplementary to measured productivitymust
be paid for. But it is essentially impossible
to design a tax system that places no
marginal burden on the rewards for productive
effort, or a regulatory system that has
no cost in measured output. Similarly, we
can hardly design a transfer system whichup
to a point-necessarily divorces income
from work, but which yet does not qualify
economic incentives. There is a presumption,
therefore, that the tax-transfer-regulatory
system, whatever its essential, longterm,
indirect, supportive role, operates more
immediately and directly to constrict work,
saving, investment, and mobility-just how
much is, of course, a question.
There is, therefore, an uneasy manyfaceted
tension between measured productivity
growth and the private earnings it
generates on the one side, and the pursuit of
other welfare goals through government on
the other side. The tension implies a difficult
and delicate problem of choice and
balance. A balance-certainly a wide acceptance
of the pace and nature of our joint
pursuit of different welfare goals- seemed
to exist during the first two postwar decades
when productivity growth was relatively
rapid. That balance, if it was a balance,
has, however, now been upset by the protracted
retardation of productivity growth
during the last dozen or more years. That is
the second reason why productivity growth
is a useful focuis for examining the current
dissatisfaction with our mixed economy.
I shall deal briefly with three matters:
1) What were the developments which
were antecedent to (which stand in the
background of) our present troubles and its
accompanying discontent?
2) What can we now say about the
causes of the current productivity retardation?
In particular, to what extent is the
retardation connected with the enlarged role
of government and its pursuit of alternative
social goals?
3) What is the outlook for productivity
growth, and what are the implications of
that outlook for the further development of
our mixed economic system?
II
In the early part of the postwar period,
economic growth, in the aggregate and per
capita, established itself as a premier goal of
economic policy-co-equal with "full" employment,
perhaps of even higher priority.
Besides the standard reason, that per capita
growth raises average levels of consumption,
there were special reasons. Growth was seen
as the best way to overcome poverty without
the social conflicts accompanying redistribution.
It would create a favorable environment
in which to open opportunities for
blacks and other minorities. It would provide
the resources for meeting still other
social goals, for example, extended education
and health care. Growth was also sought
to maintain defense, to compete politically
with a fast-growing Soviet Union and to
assert continued leadership in our rapidly
progressing alliance. Growth would enable
us to help not only the poor in our own
country, it would permit us to help the still
more impoverished people of the lessdeveloped
world. Productivity growth was a
goal distinguishable from full employment,
but it was also seen-not necessarily correctly-
as a condition of full employment.
Unless we could hold our own in international
trade, our foreign accounts would impose
demand restraints on policy and make
for chronic underemployment.
This growth, so ardently desired, was in
fact achieved. For two decades, income per
capita grew faster than ever before and output
per hour much faster. At the same time,
there was a rapid development of government
in pursuit of other welfare objectives,
and this was also eagerly sought. The Social
Security system established in the 1930's
was enlarged; education was rapidly extended;
science was fostered; there were
large programs for hospital building and
housing. The proportion of the population
living below defined poverty levels was