However, Robert Shiller's recent paper
"Do Stock Prices Move Much Too Much to
be Justified by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?
" appears to demolish the possibility
that movements of U.S. stock prices can be
explained by the rational expectations of
share holders.2' For over a century, real stock
prices appear to have fluctuated far more
than any plausible change in the rational
expectation of real dividends or earnings.
Shiller does not attempt to characterize the
source of the greatly excessive volatility of
stock prices. But, surely, it is possible that
speculative price bubbles, upward or downward,
based upon the extrapolation of nominal
share-price levels and movements, and
on the effort to profit (or to avoid loss) from
such movements, supply some part of the
explanation. Another piece of the explanation
for recent stock prices may well be
Franco Modigliani's and Richard Cohn's
"inflation-illusion" theory-itself clearly inconsistent
with rational expectations.
The rational expectations theory, at least
as applied to individual commodities, assumes
that there exists, at all times, some
long-run equilibrium price-that price which
would equate amounts produced and consumed.
Market participants can and do have
at least a rough idea of what this price is;
moreover, their individual estimates of this
price are basically similar, for all have essentially
the same information, and use essentially
the same model of how that price is
determined.
Those who attempt to apply the concept
of rational expectations to the stock market
rarely state their understanding of what is
the equilibrium price level for shares-or of a
particular share-that it would be rational
for participants to expect. Is it the level of
share prices at which net new issues of shares
would be zero? Or would it be the level of
share prices at which net private investment
would be zero? The level at which net private
investment would equal net saving at full
employment? The level at which investment
might maintain the economy on a Golden
Rule growth path? Or is there some concept
of a less-fundamental, less-long-run equilibrium
level of share prices which market
participants can be expected to understand
and quantitatively approximate? If there is
no such concept of equilibrium share-price
level, how can there be a unique rational
expectation of share prices?
A simpler course is to admit that we have
no very precise concept of an equilibrium
level of share prices, but to argue that we can
nevertheless predict the direction and rate of
movement over time of that equilibrium,
whatever it may be. The rate of movement
might, for example, be expected to approximate
the rate of growth of profits or of
dividends per share. (This was Shiller's device.
) This may suffice for rough tests of the
ex post rationality of historical share price
movements. But it offers essentially zero
guidance to the purchaser or seller of a
particular stock at a particular time. He must
guess whether the prices of particular stocks
will rise or fall, over some less than infinite
horizon, from where they stand today. Is it
strange that he is more concerned with the
correctness of his guess about what other
buyers and sellers are expecting will happen
to prices of those particular shares, and to
the market averages? Is there a better description
than the "beauty contest" parable?
Actually, Keynes' description of the determination
of stock prices is far more detailed
and substantive than I have here described
it, and I recommend its occasional
rereading. However, there is no reason to
suppose that Keynes in 1935 had the last
word on stock prices. Henry Wallich, an
acute observer, who began his distinguished
career on Wall Street, has recently written
about the "Radical Revisions of the Distant
Future" that occur from time to time in the
stock market, and for which one cannot find
rational explanation, in any narrow sense of
that term. His explanation for at least a part
of the most recent "radical revision" -since
about 1973-runs in terms that I can perhaps
best describe as "sociological":
One might guess that [the reasons for
this massive change in investment attitudes]
have something to do with
21For an important related paper, reaching similar
conclusions by different techniques, see William
Brainard, John Shoven, and Laurence Weiss.