the bad old days of the annually balanced
budget are enormous, but economists are
aware of the limitations of the FES measure
and are struggling to resolve them.
Just as economics relegated erroneous
budget concepts to the dustbin, so it has
cast a shadow over such former favorites
(of mine, among others) as federal capital
budgeting and the "shelf of public works."
The initial enthusiasm for the capital
budget concept (in the context of a Congress
seeking to balance the budget annually)
was dispelled by second-thought
analysis showing that (a) it rested on some
faulty parallels with private finance, (b)
the implicit fiscal policy rule of always
financing capital projects by borrowing is
in error, and (c) it would bias government
capital spending toward bricks and mortar
instead of brainpower and people. In the
public works case, the concept ran afoul
the findings of prosaic economic research:
recent studies show that the public works
program launched in 1963 to speed recovery
was far from completed before
excess demand overtook us in the 1966-69
period. This is not to rule out the use of
certain types of "public works" that are
nimble on their feet, such as road and
forest maintenance work, for stabilization
purposes. Nor does it rule out speeding
up or delaying the launching of projects
that are to be undertaken for sound costbenefit
reasons in any event. But it is
fair warning not to expect very much
stabilization help from the public works
sector (not to be confused with public
service employment).
In the conscious use of taxes for stabilization
purposes, the huge 1964 income
tax cut delivered economic expansion and
a balanced budget on schedule without inflation
by mid-1965, just before the Vietnam
escalation struck the economy. The
temporary 1968 surtax, buffeted by powerful
demand forces and monetary easing,
left a more ambiguous econometric trail.
Subsequent fiscal policy thinking emphasizes
the advantages of temporary tax
changes that embody not just income effects
but intertemporal substitution effects.
For example, lowering the prices of investment
goods in a recession via a clearly
temporary increase in the investment
credit, or temporary cuts in consumption
taxes on durable goods (or lacking these,
temporary purchase subsidies), would constitute
a powerful incentive to purchase
those goods before the price went up
again.
Further work is needed to measure the
cost-push effects of anti-inflationary tax
increases that offset part of their demanddamping
effect. In recession, the costeasing
and demand-push effects work in
happy harmony. They work at cross purposes
in tax increases (though not in
expenditure cuts) to curb inflation. The
question of how large the offsetting costpush
effects, or aggregate supply effects,
may be, is unresolved. In a high-inflation
economy, this is a serious gap in our fiscal
policy knowledge.
Other Aspects
This kaleidoscope of contributions, long
as it is, leaves out a whole string of developments
in budget concepts, techniques,
and processes-efforts that were
crowned by the congressional budget reforms
recently put into effect. Much of the
guidance and momentum for these reforms
was provided by economic analysis and by
a succession of five economist-budget directors
throughout the 1960's. Also omitted is
the conceptual work on the economics of
the bureaucratic process, of how government
works. Other omissions include the
rebirth of interest and great advances in
the economics of state-local finance, the
rapid growth of the important new field of
urban economics-with its contributions
to regional economics, location research,
and analysis of the city as an economic sys-