Standard Medicare with Medigap policies
that cover drugs

Employee- or union-provided coverage, including
drugs

Medicare Advantage (HMO or PPO) policies
that cover drugs

Medicaid beneficiaries

Generally, those in the last three categories receive
Part D coverage by default. Those with
Standard Medicare will default out of Part D
if they do not take action, but have the choice
of enrolling in a privately offered plan, or of
converting to Medicare Advantage coverage.
In virtually all cases, there are Part D plans
that are more advantageous than Medigap
policy drug coverage. The analysis that follows
applies to the people currently on Standard
Medicare.

CMS has established a standard plan under
Part D that has an annual premium of $444, a
deductible of $250, pays 75 percent of prescription
drug pharmacy bills above $250 up to
$2,250, provides no additional benefits until
pharmacy bills reach $5,100, and pays 95 percent
of pharmacy bills above that level. CMS
requires approved private plans to offer comparable
coverage.

Table 4 summarizes consumer out-of-pocket
costs under the standard plan, not including the
annual premium, for various pharmacy bills.
The private insurers who provide drug coverage
within the Plan D framework may offer enhancements
to the standard plan, at higher
premiums, including coverage for the $250 deductible
and/or for the gap or "doughnut hole"
in the standard plan, which pays no added benefits
for pharmacy bills above $2,250 or below
$5,100. They may offer broader formularies
than Medicare requires, variations in the coinsurance
or copayment tier structure, and convenience
features such as broad pharmacy
participation and mail-order services. Approved
plans must have formularies that include at least
two drugs in each therapeutic category; the fraction
of the 100 most frequently prescribed drugs
included in currently approved formularies
ranges from 65 percent to 100 percent, with a
median of about 90 percent. Enrollees may
change plans annually. There are penalties for
late enrollment, currently a 1-percent increase
in premiums per month's delay past the initial
enrollment period, which ends in May 2006. In
evaluating alternatives, consumers need to take
into account not only their current pharmacy
bills, but also the probabilities of developing
new health conditions that will require treatment,
and the distribution of costs of these
treatments. As a result, consumers are being
asked to make relatively complex plan assessments,
generally with relatively incomplete information
on future prospects. Because of the
late enrollment penalties, there is not only a
current financial risk of making a poor decision,
but also an option pricing problem of determining
the value of enrolling to lock in current
premium rates. Not surprisingly, some seniors
are finding this a difficult choice, and the media
has had a field day publicizing Part D's complexity.
The economic policy question is this:
After the dust settles, will most consumers have
made good use of the choices offered by the
private market, so that a market-oriented design
contributes to consumer well-being? Is further
intervention on behalf of the vulnerable
needed?

Our survey, entitled the "Retirement Perspectives
Survey" (RPS-2005), was fielded as a
self-administered Internet questionnaire from
November 7-15, 2005, using a panel of subjects
enrolled by Knowledge Networks, a commercial
survey firm. This panel was recruited from
a random sample of the underlying population,
and all panel members were provided with identical
hardware (Web TVs) through which they