I remind you of Martin Feldstein's com-
plex analyses of the interaction of tax laws
and inflation as affecting the profitability
of investment. Alternatively, there is Dale
Jorgenson's "neoclassical" investment the-
ory, which carefully models the relationship
among all of the prices and quantities that
enter into dynamic profit-maximizing invest-
ment decisions.'8
As a third example, there is James Tobin's
theory, suggested by Keynes, that focuses on
the relationship between the aggregate market
value of the marketable debt and equity
claims against existing enterprises, and the
aggregate cost of reproducing, at today's
prices, the assets of those enterprises. The
ratio of these two global magnitudes has
come to be designated as "q."
I propose to conclude these comments on
price-theoretical explanations of investment
with a few remarks on the q theory. The
Keynes-Tobin approach makes the volume
of aggregate investment dependent upon
-indeed, ordinarily taken as proportional
to-the excess of q over 1: where q is the
ratio of the market value of enterprises to the
replacement cost of their assets. The market
value of enterprises includes the value both
of equities and debts, as currently priced in
security markets; the replacement cost of
their assets is the reproduction cost of exist-
ing plant, equipment, and inventories at cur-
rent price levels."9
However formulated in detail, the q theory
of course employs much of the same infor-
mation that is used in other macroeconomic
theories of investment. For example, most
investment theories incorporate a bond-
market interest yield, presumably to repre-
sent the cost of borrowed long-term funds,
or the alternate return on owned funds. Some
investment theories may use short-term in-
terest rates, as well, to represent the cost of
(or the alternative return on) funds borrowed
to finance inventories or other working
capital, or to finance the purchase of capital
goods while awaiting more favorable rates in
the long-term market. The q theory incorpo-
rates interest rates as they affect the value of
marketable debt claims against enterprises.
This use of interest rates in the q theory is
thus conventional in investment theory.
What is essentially unique about the q
formulation is its inclusion of the market
value of stocks: the price level of ownership
of corporations. This can be thought of as an
indirect measure of the cost (or opportunity
cost) of equity funds.20 Given the typical
volatility of share prices, medium-run move-
ments of q are often or perhaps ordinarily
dominated by changes in the prices and thus
the market value of outstanding shares.
With that in mind, let me recall to you my
earlier discussion of the speculative demand
for and supply of storable commodi-
ties-gold was the specific example. You
recall my borrowing Keynes' parable of the
beauty contest to describe such markets. You
also recall that this parable was, in fact,
Keynes' analogy for the price determination
of equities.
In recent years, economists have been pay-
ing greatly increased attention to stock
prices-a subject largely avoided by econo-
mists after the debacle, in and after 1929,
both of share prices and of economists' fore-
casts of share prices. The revival of
economists' interest in stocks has involved
the development and application of the
"capital asset pricing model" and associated
"portfolio theories," and, most recently, the
attempted application of rational expec-
tations theory to stock prices.