We are reminded ad nauseam that the
"new economists" of the 1960's had
promised to fine-tune inflation out of
their full employment economy (a clearcut
triumph of caricature over fact
since Keynesians time and again warned
of precisely the opposite danger).
Myrdal and Heilbroner have pointed
to stagflation as Exhibit A that economists
typically lag rather than lead
their targets, that being "behind its
time" is "the regular methodological
weakness of establishment economics."
Von Hayek recently reentered the
fray to lay the blame for worldwide
inflation squarely at the door of economists,
particularly those "who have
embraced the teachings of Lord
Keynes."

Apart from the charge that Keynesian
economists have caused inflation (which
is much like saying that the cause of forest
fires is trees), the bill of particulars against
macroeconomics runs something like this:
First, it did not forewarn the body politic
that it would have to pay such a high
price in endemic inflation for the attainment
of high employment. Second, its
progress in solving some important puzzles
of endemic inflation relating, for
example, to the Phillips curve, wage inflation,
expectations, and uncertainty is
much too slow. Third, there is no articulated
genefal theory of inflation as such.
Fourth, economists failed to foresee the
1973-74 epidemic inflation because their
forecasting models lacked the central
supply and price parameters. Fifth, macroeconomics
is helpless in the face of epidemic
or external-shock inflation-indeed,
it has not satisfactorily explained the coexistence
of inflation and recession, or
stagflation. Without attempting a pointby-
point assessment of these complaints,
I will touch on all of them in the following
sympathetic interpretation of how economists
are coping with inflation's tough
analytic and empirical challenges.
Addressing myself for a moment to our
reproachful public, let me simply say to
them: "We never promised you a rose
garden without thorns." Over most of the
past thirty years, macroeconomists have
warned again and again, first, that aggressive
fiscal and monetary policy to
manage aggregate demand was bound to
generate inflationary pressures once the
economy entered the full employment
zone, and second, that while full employment
spells inflation, recessions run into
price and wage rigidities that thwart deflation,
an asymmetry bound to produce a
ratchet effect on the price level. Keynes
himself foresaw the basic problem in his
little book, How to Pay for the War, in
1940. Abba Lerner and William Beveridge
also wrote of the problem in the early
1940's. And it has been discussed in the
stabilization theory and policy literature,
in congressional hearings, and in other
policy forums ever since.
This country finally embraced activist
fiscal policies for full employment in the
1960's, most explicitly in the 1964 tax cut.
Following the canons of Keynesian economics,
focussing on the economy's full
employment potential as their target, and
steadfastly rejecting a spate of "structural"
explanations of unemployment,
economists were at first alone in prescribing
tax cuts as a tonic for the stagnant
economy. Enacted early in 1964, the tax
cut delivered the promised expansion and
budget balance without inflation. By
August 1965, when Vietnam escalation
began, unemployment had been brought
to 4.4 percent with only the faintest stirring
of the inflationary beast (i.e., with
consumer prices rising at less than a 2 percent
annual rate).

In a very real sense, economists have
been victims of their own success. Macroeconomic