I. Evolution of Theory, Understanding,
and Policy
A. The Early Years
As developing countries gained independence
from their former colonial rulers, 5 their
leaders had a political mandate to achieve
higher living standards and rapid economic
growth.6 It is difficult in the 1990's to recall
the extent to which it was then plausible to
view the world economy as split into the industrialized
countries and the underdeveloped
countries, or "first world" and "third world,"
as they were often called. Underdeveloped
countries had markedly lower average educational
attainments (including a great deal of
illiteracy and a high fraction of the population
with no schooling), poor health conditions,
and very little infrastructure. They were heavily
specialized in the production and export of
primary commodities and imported most of
their manufactured goods. While differences
among the underdeveloped countries were acknowledged,
these seemed minor contrasted
with the overwhelming realities of their common
attributes and widespread poverty.
The new field of development economics
was regarded by many as covering underdevelopment
because "conventional economics"
did not apply (see Albert Hirschman, 1982).
Focus on how the developing countries should
shape policies for accelerating growth and
raising living standards was the central issue.7
B. Accepted Stylized Facts and Premises
Early trade and development theories and
policy prescriptions were based on some
widely accepted stylized facts and premises
about the underdeveloped countries. These
were a mixture of touristic impressions, halftruths,
and misapplied policy inferences. In
hindsight, it is surprising how some thenaccepted
stylized "facts" were so uncritically
accepted and held sway for so long. However,
it is not possible to understand what thinking
about trade and development was except in
light of those premises. Indeed, it can be argued
that improved understanding of trade and
development came about in large part through
research which effectively demonstrated the
falsity of these premises.
A first premise was based on the fact-then
certainly true-that developing economies'
production structures were heavily oriented toward
primary commodity production. The dependence
on foreign trade was believed to be
extreme, as there was virtually no production
capacity for manufactured goods outside a few
light mass-consumed commodities. However,
many observers went further and attributed the
low living standards in developing countries
to dependence on primary commodity production
and export.
A second "fact," or premise, was that if
developing countries adopted policies of free
trade, their comparative advantage would forever
lie in primary commodity production. It
followed that industrialization and, hence, development
would not take place if free trade
policies were adopted.
A third premise-termed "export pessimism"
-was that both the global income and
price elasticities of demand for primary commodities
were low. Consequently, it was anticipated
that export earnings would not grow
very rapidly, if at all.8
'Latin America and a few other countries (including
China, Thailand, and Turkey), then deemed "underdeveloped,
" were not formally colonies prior to the Second
World War. However, it was widely believed that they had
been "economically dependent." The leaders and elite in
most poor countries shared the perception that their economies
were "different" from industrialized countries and
like other developing countries. The G-77 (77 countries),
or nonaligned nations, were all developing countries
whose leaders perceived themselves to be in a similar economic
situation with similar goals of rapid growth and
improved living standards.
6 As was then conventional, I shall assume here that
higher living standards, more rapid growth, and economic
development were/are synonymous for purposes of analyzing
trade policy.
7 There was, to be sure, a growing literature on the contribution
of technical change and factor accumulation to
growth in the industrialized countries. But most development
economists saw that research as irrelevant for developing
countries.
8 Another widely held view, closely related to export
pessimism, was the proposition that the terms of trade had
inexorably deteriorated against primary commodities and
would continue to do so. Investigation of this proposition