THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
would be more severe in the absence of a program.
These different shortcomings in preparation
for retirement relate to different issuesinadequate
overall provision for retirement
relates to having a mandatory program, inadequate
annuitization relates to providing benefits
in annuitized form, inadequate protection of
family members relates to providing benefits for
surviving spouses and young children. I start
with the annuitization issue, since there is little
overt move to end the mandatory nature of
Social Security as a whole. But there are calls
for decreasing the role of annuities in Social
Security.
But first a word on the Arrow-Debreu framework.
I have referred to it above as a way to
describe the properties of a Pareto-optimal allocation.
I think that when economists quickly
consider economic issues outside their own subdisciplines,
they frequently think implicitly in
terms of the Arrow-Debreu model with its connection
to first-best outcomes (also incorporating
overlapping generations for some issues). In
contrast, economists thinking about issues in
their subdisciplines often share a framework
that is more complex and are more inclined to
do second-best analyses, which are more directly
policy-relevant. As in other subdisciplines,
analysts of Social Security are well
aware of the issues I have identified, although
the issues are not present in all analyses by any
means. The Arrow-Debreu model tends to start
our thinking in terms of the standard, fully
rational model of individual decision making
and in terms of a complete set of markets. That
is a reasonable place to start as long as it is not
also the end of modeling and thinking. For
example, simulations of Social Security reforms
that assume an overlapping generations model
with fully rational lifetime utility maximization
should not be taken as the whole story for Social
Security policy-making. It is inadequate and
potentially misleading to study the effects of
Social Security in models in which there is no
particular reason for Social Security to exist in
the first place. This would be akin to treating
Pigouvian taxation to correct externalities as
distortive by ignoring the externalities.
Interest in the description of behavior that
deviates from that in the Arrow-Debreu model
has grown enormously lately. Long before behavioral
economics became a hot topic, public
policies reflected recognition that the model of  homo economicus, while very useful, is not a
fully adequate basis for the design of all policies.
For example, federal legislation introduced
a "cooling-off' period during which contracts
with door-to-door salespeople could be cancelled
without penalty precisely because of deviations
from homo economicus. And social
security discussions have long recognized inadequate
savings for retirement by many workers
and inadequate annuitization by most. In addition,
social security systems have been concerned
about protection of the family and not
just the worker.9 Also possibly relevant, but not
much studied, is whether significant numbers of
workers retire too soon for their own good.
These issues of poor choices in the presence of
available opportunities are in addition to insurance
market limitations that come from
market incompleteness and from asymmetric  information.
Inadequate attention to the future in general
and its stochastic structure in particular implies
some form of time inconsistency. Normative
criteria for evaluating institutions become more
complicated without time consistency throughout
the population. Insofar as individuals are not
time-consistent, it seems essential to do normative
evaluations in terms of shorter periods (e.g.,
years) as well as in terms of lifetimes. We care
about actual consumption levels as well as the
levels of lifetime resources.
This requires more than just a positive theory
of how people determine consumption but also
normative criteria for evaluating consumption
at different times. The vocabulary of someone
being different selves at different times is suggestive,
although I am concerned that taking it
too literally, failing to recognize the tight links
between the different selves who are the same
person at somewhat different ages, is failing to
address adequately the underlying issues.'? And
9 The growth of two-career families has altered the na-  ture of this concern and presumably the most sensible  design for the system, but has not made the problem go  away. There is a tension in social security systems, just as  there is in income taxation, between treatment of individu-  als and treatment of the family. Diversity in the way resources
are allocated within different families affects the
evaluation of different benefit designs.  10 More generally, there is a difference between taking a  model literally and taking it seriously-which involves  learning from models in order to think about a reality that is  more complex than is captured in any model-indeed that is
4
MARCH 2004