advantage at producing the lower-quality variety
and the curve labeled 92 refers to a seller
whose production conditions are better suited to
high quality. Since (pl lies everywhere above
(Zh, Ph), seller 1 cannot offer the high-quality
variety at a profit level higher than that obtained
by offering the low-quality variety. Conversely,
since (P2 lies everywhere above (zl, Pl), seller 2
cannot offer the low-quality variety at a profit
level higher than that obtained by offering the
high-quality variety. Sellers whose minimum
acceptable profit-offer curve cover both prices
produce both objects. An example of such a
seller is one with offer function Sp*, who is
indifferent between selling the two varieties.
Some auto manufacturers produce a full
product line and others specialize in niche markets.
Research universities cater to students
with superior high-school records and achievements,
and would not be very cost effective as
junior colleges. Climatic and geographic endowments
give some California vineyards advantages
in producing high-quality wine that is
much harder to produce in New York and Michigan,
yet some California vintners produce both
higher- and lower-quality brands. The prestigious
law firms handling large legal claims are
careful about which cases they take on and
whom they admit as partners. Production activities
in which workers directly interact require
personnel who complement each other's personal
productivity and efficiency characteristics.
Because of direct complementarity in most
production settings, more interpersonal variation
in efficiency within production units can be
tolerated by transacting through the market
rather than directly in teams. Impersonal
transactions are the equivalent of intermediate
product markets and reduce the adverse consequences
that occur when less efficient workers
pull down the productivity of more efficient
ones.

Figure 1 shows how the market sustains diversity
as an equilibrium phenomenon. Different
kinds of buyers purchase different kinds of
goods. Consumers with tastes that correspond to
O'(z) buy z1 at price Pi and are supplied by
sellers with bid functions that correspond to
pl(z). Consumers with tastes that correspond
to 02( z) buy z, at price Ph and are supplied by
sellers with bid functions that correspond to
(p2( z). Neither seller has any incentive to try to
sell to consumers of the other type, nor does any
buyer have any incentive to purchase from the
other type of seller. All four types of agents can
do no better, given the opportunities available.
A. Interpreting the Implicit Value of
Characteristics

Empirical investigations of product and labor
differentiation use cross-section data to relate
prices p with attributes z. The hedonic regression
method regresses product prices on product
characteristics. It was initially developed to
study real cost reductions in auto and other
durable goods manufacturing that were concealed
by product design changes and quality
improvements. In labor economics, wages of
workers are regressed on their personal productivity
and job characteristics. In land and housing
markets, site and structure prices are
regressed on house attributes (size, architectural
style, and age) and onsite characteristics (neighborhood,
location, and public services). Labor
and land market studies are useful for imputing
the social value of certain intangible goods, like
safety and clean environments. An important
use in goods markets is to construct price and
quantity indexes that control for changes in the
quality of goods over time.
B. Cross-Section Values

Environmental and safety concerns are at the
forefront of public policy today. The rhetoric
and passions they arouse make it easy to forget
that these goods are costly to produce and that
rational decisions require comparing their benefits
with their costs. Assessing the costs of
these kinds of public policies is like finding the
costs of any other investment. Assessing benefits
requires estimating the willingness of consumers
to pay for more safety and better
environments. Practice is tricky because there
exist no explicit markets where safety and clean
air are directly traded, and from which demand
values can be directly inferred. Instead, safety
and environmental quality often are by-products
of other transactions and their valuations must
be imputed from the observed packages in
which they play a part.

Exposure to risk and pollution are affected by
work and residential choices. Some jobs are