consumer durables, and financial securities.
The most ambitious social science project ever
undertaken, the first wave of HRS cost
$14,000,000 and the second wave was budgeted
for $17,000,000. A third wave is currently
under way collecting information on the birth
cohorts of 1942-1947 (F. Thomas Juster and
Richard Suzman, 1995).

NIA launched a second longitudinal survey
aimed at cohorts born in 1924 or earlier years.
This sample, which is called Asset and Health
Dynamics. Among the Oldest Old (AHEAD),
consists of persons aged 70 years and older in
1994, when the first wave was undertaken. Although
the questions in AHEAD overlap with
HRS, functional ability is investigated intensively
and labor-market activity is covered
lightly.

Both HRS and AHEAD have made it possible
to examne a wide range of issues with
more reliable and more detailed evidence than
previously available. James P. Smith and
Raynard Kington (1997), for example, have
used AHEAD to examine disparities in functional
status and to relate them to socioeconomic
status (SES variables). They
discovered strong feedback effects not only
from health to SES variables but from SES
variables to health. To disentangle these effects
they broke household income and wealth
into various categories made possible by the
data and examined the effects by age. They
were also able to make use of a range of variables
bearing on the health and socioeconomnic
status of relatives in three generations (parents,
siblings, and children). Their analysis indicated
that cuffent-period health and income
are attributes of past, concurent, and future
generations. Measuring the full extent of these
influences, the direction of causation, and
complex interactions requires the study of lifecycle
histories from birth to very old age. It
would be inappropriate, they concluded, to use
SES variables to explain variations in late-age
health without taking account of the feedback
mechanisms or identifying within-period innovations
in the stock of health (cf. John
Bound et al., 1998).

Such findings point to the usefulness of creating
a prospective life-cycle sanple for an extinct
cohort (the veteratns of the Union Army)
by utilizing military, pension, and census records
in archives. This procedure not only creates a
longitudinal data base in a small fraction of the
time required to trace a living cohor, but cm be
done at less than a tenth of the normnal cost. Such
a project was launched by NIA in 1996 (cf,
Clayne L. Pope and Larry T. Wimmer, 1998).
Based on 11 different data sets, the fully
linked life histories contain over 10,000 variables
on each recruit, including socioeconomic,
ecological, and health variables. Called "Early
Idicators of Later Work Levels, Disease, d
Death," this project provides a conmprehensive
data set on the life course of over 39,000 Union
Amy veterans. Bor mainly between 1835 and
1845, these men represented the first cohor to
reach age 65 in the twentieth cent , d can
be compared with the veterans of World Wa IL1.
The preliminary comparisons revealed that at
the same ages the prevalence of chronic diseases
was much higher among elderly Uniion Any
veterans tha among veteras of World War IL
Musculoskeletal and respiratoy diseases were
16 times as prevalent, heart diseases were 2.9
times as prevyent, and digestive diseases were
4.7 times as prevalent among elderly veterans in
1910 than in the niid-1980's (cf., Sven E.
Wilson and Louis L. Nguyen, 1998). Moreover,
young adults bom during the second quaer of
the nineteenth centr who survived the deadly
contagious diseases of childhood and early adolescence
were not freer of degenerative diseases
than persons of the samne ages today, as
propounded by the theory of epidemiological
transition, but were more afflicted. Heria rates
at ages 35-39, for exanmple, were more than
three times as prevalent in the 1860's as in the
1980's.

Although the analysis of the data in the Un
ion Army sample is still in progress, some of
the initial findings have a bearing on forecasts
of long-term trends in health status. Costa
( 1998b) has reported that early-age socioeconomiic
and biomedical stress had a substantial
impact on the likelihood that Union Army vet
erans would have disabling chronic health
conditions by age 60. Thus, veterans raised in
a county with high mortality rates were, half a
century later, at elevated risks of suffering
from disabling respiratory disease, circulatory
disease, and musculoskeletal problems (cf.,
Lee, 1997). Episodes of acute diseases experienced
as youtng adults, such as respiratory