and, with quadratic utility, to uncertain incomes.
37 In standard terminology, the value of
her discounted income is called her wealth; the
amount of that wealth that can be spent without
its depletion is called permanent income.38 An
alternative expression of Friedman's hypothesis
is that consumption depends on permanent  rather than on current income.39
The permanent income hypothesis may be in
accordance with most standard economic models.
Nevertheless, it contradicted prior thinking
about the consumption function. Keynes, and  his followers, believed that current income
played an especially important role in the determination
of current consumption.
"The fundamental psychological law [emphasis
added], upon which we are entitled
to depend with great confidence both a
priori from our knowledge of human nature
and from the detailed facts of experience,
is that men are disposed, as a rule
and on the average, to increase their consumption
as income increases, but not by
as much as the increase in income" (Keynes,
The General Theory, 1936, 96).
It is true that The General Theory discussed a
long list of other factors that could affect consumption.
The list was sufficiently rich to include
not only current income, but also all the
other determinants of wealth, such as expected
future income and the rate of interest. But that
does not make Keynes's theory identical to
Friedman's. In the Keynesian theory, consumers
are more sensitive to current income than to
other changes in income that have similar effect
on the consumer's wealth.
A. Empirical Results and Their Explanation
A large number of tests have demonstrated the
excess sensitivity of consumption to current income,
in concert with the Keynesian consumption
function. For example, John Y. Campbell and
N. Gregory Mankiw (1989) nested both Friedman'
s view that consumption depends solely on
wealth and the simplified Keynesian view that
consumption depends solely on income. They
suppose that a fraction of consumers A are pure
Keynesians, while a fraction (1 - A) behave according
to the permanent income hypothesis; they
estimate A from the extent to which consumption
overreacts to changes in income that would be
predictable from past changes in income and consumption.
Usefully, then, A gives a natural measure
of the departure from the permanent income
hypothesis. The estimates of A are significant statistically
and also of significant magnitude economically:
between 40 and 50 percent (depending
upon whether three or five periods are used to
predict the change in current income).
Other studies corroborate such excess dependence
on current income: John Shea (1985), for
union members whose contracts specified their  37 The simple proof is that her utility-maximizing con-  sumption will depend upon the intercept and the slope of the  budget line. The budget line states that the present dis-  counted value of consumption is the present discounted  value of her future income, which is what Friedman calls
her wealth. The intercept of the budget line is her wealth.  That is how much she could consume today if she consumed
nothing tomorrow. And the slope of the budget line is  determined by the rate of interest r: on the budget line for  every unit of c, she gives up (1 + r) units of c2. Her  consumption will be on the highest attainable utility indif-  ference curve. That will be the indifference curve that is just  tangent to the budget line. As a result, we see that, given the
utility function, c1 will be a function of W and r. Note that  current income does not come into this expression.  38 Formally, permanent income is the product of the rate  of interest and wealth.
39 The permanent income hypothesis also generalizes to  currently popular models of present bias. In these models  consumers have present bias in the form of "hyperbolic dis-  counting," which means that they put extra weight in their  utility functions on their current consumption. In this case, the  typical consumer's plans will not be consistent, but they can be  analyzed as if she has multiple selves. Her self today decides  on how much to consume today and then passes on the re-  maining assets to her self tomorrow. There is an exact analogy  to the parent's maximization in Barro's model of bequests. In  that model, today's consumer passes on assets to her child in  the next generation; in consumer theory, today's consumer  passes on assets to her new self in the next period. Since the  standard model of intertemporal consumption and Barro's  model of consumption are exactly isomorphic, Ricardian  equivalence then tells us that current consumption-which is  the consumption of the initial self-depends only on the con-  sumer's wealth. David I. Laibson (1997) thus shows that
consumption with forward-looking consumers with hyperbolic  discounting will balance the marginal utility of present con-  sumption out of wealth against the marginal utility of future  consumption according to an Euler condition. Such a condition  is wealth-based. It is the generalization of the tangency of the
utility indifference curve to the budget line in the two-period  model of Irving Fisher. Both Friedman and Laibson obtain  consumption that is determined solely by current income if  there is a constraint on current borrowing, and consumers'  desires for current consumption exceed their current income.  There is nothing inherent in the preferences in either case that  causes current consumption to be based on current income.