absence from utility constitutes the missing
motivation of macroeconomics.
The Link of Entitlements and Obligations to
Current Income.-It remains to relate current
spending to current income. Norms may be
complex. But a web of evidence still reveals a
strong association between current income and
entitlements and obligations to spend. Such a
link, in turn, produces the excess sensitivity of
consumption on current income in Keynes's
Psychological Law.
A few examples follow.
* It is common practice in the United States for
parents, even for rich ones with no budget
constraint, to expect their children to assume
financial independence after their graduation
from college. They are indicating their belief
in the norm that the child is entitled to spend
what she earns. (Most parents, of course, give
their children a helping hand as they seek
their independence. But that does not mean
that they do not also strongly believe that their
children should live on their earnings, since that
norm is only one of their motivations.)
* In a thought experiment, consider a woman
living on $50,000 a year who learns that
her uncle will die in one year leaving her
$2,000,000. Even if she has considerable sav-
ings in the bank, it would be unseemly for her
to run down her savings in anticipation of the
bequest. She is not entitled to do so. She
should stick to spending from her current
income. This gives another example in which
norms regarding entitlements to spend are
related to current income, in violation of the
life-cycle hypothesis.
* People's expenditures are supposed to reflect
their stations in life, and those stations usu-
ally reflect their earnings. Thus, for example,
college students with little earnings are sup-
posed to live that way-like college students.
Their current spending is supposed to reflect
their current earnings, not what they will be
earning in the future. (At the other extreme,
as an obligation, the college president is often
expected to live in the presidential mansion.)
* Preliminary results from an experiment by
John Morgan and myself illustrate another
relation between entitlement and earnings. In
this experiment, subjects were asked to do-
nate to a charity before and after completing
a task. Those who were asked for the dona-
tion afterward were more likely to keep the
money than those who were asked before-
hand. Those who had completed the task felt
that they had earned the money and were thus
entitled to keep it for themselves.49
* The mental accounting model by Hersh M.
Shefrin and Richard H. Thaler (1988) is espe-
cially useful in our quest for a Keynesian con-
sumption function. Norms take many forms, so
their formal model is not unique.50 But it does
illustrate a possible link between consumption
and current income. In this model, people have
three separate mental accounts: current income,
current assets, and future income combined
with pension wealth. As consumers exhaust one
of these accounts and begin to use the next one
for their current consumption, they incur a dis-
continuous "penalty." Those penalties are psy-
chological in nature-this is a model of mental
accounting-and they take the form of a loss in
utility.51 Corresponding to Shefrin and Thaler's
assumptions regarding the nature of these costs,
as consumption rises, consumers will first fi-
nance it wholly from current income; then,
from current assets; and, finally, from future  income and retirement wealth.
As we discussed earlier, it should be no sur-
prise that there is an exact translation of such a
model into one with norms regarding entitle-  ments to consume. The rules of mental account-
ing become the norms regarding how money
should be spent. The basic norm is that con-
sumption should come from current income.