between other goods and housing, those whose
incomes are below Yk derive higher utility from
living in the low-quality house in a low-amenity
location and those whose incomes are above Yk
derive higher utility from living in the high-
quality house in a high-amenity location. But
consumers with incomes between YI and Y2 can
improve their expected utility by entering into
gambles, which would offer them expected util-
ity that lies along the line that connects A and B.
For example, an individual with income yo who
chooses to live in a low-quality house offering
utility U(yo - Pl, zl) would prefer a fair gam-
ble that paid income Yi half the time and income
Y2 half the time. Were he to lose the gamble, he
would live in the low-quality house and derive
utility U(y, - pl, Z,). Were he to win, he would
live in the high-quality house and derive utility
U(Y2 - Ph, Zh). His expected utility would be at
point C, which yields more utility than the cer-
tain utility obtained at point D.
Occupational lotteries of this sort manufac-
ture inequality but make the individuals who
enter the occupation better off. Because the
variance in outcomes gives individuals a shot at
a much better standard of living, they willingly
bear the risk that results in observed ex post
inequality. Going to a high-stakes law firm in
New York may turn out to be a good option,
offering a partnership, high income, and an en-
tertaining city in which to spend income. Those
who lose the law-firm lottery accept jobs as
corporate counsel in Kankakee, buy a less ex-
pensive house, and enjoy fewer amenities. Al-
though it is better to win the lottery than to lose
it, the existence of the risky occupation makes
all individuals who enter better off in an ex-
pected utility sense, primarily because the in-
equality manufactured by this occupation
allows different combinations of income and
amenities that are complementary.
VI. Conclusion
Despite the importance of diversity in eco-
nomic life, only a small part of economic theory
is devoted to analyzing differences. Competi-
tive markets value diversity and sort out com-
plex patterns of tastes and technologies that
translate into supply of and demand for an enor-
mous variety of products and factors of pro-
duction. Markets accommodate diversity by
establishing values that make differentiated
items relatively close substitutes at the margin.
The markets match buyers and sellers in
marriage-type equilibria where agents sort ac-
cording to their talents in response to market
prices. To bring about the appropriate sorting,
markets must create inequality in values. Thus, in
labor markets, large differences in earnings can
result even when individuals are ex ante identical.
The theory of diversity applies universally
and is manifest in many economic problems. In
addition to issues involving earnings inequality,
occupational choice, and the differentiation of
products, risk analysis of environmental safety
concerns and price index problems are analyz-
able using standard economic approaches to
diversity. In such problems, sorting is key, so
market valuations understate the average indi-
vidual's distaste for disagreeable attributes and
overstate the average individual's preference for
agreeable ones. Sorting plays a role in price index
problems, where we seek to ascertain shifts in
prices as a result of technology shifts, not move-
ments along a price line that results, say, from
increases in real income. Thus, price might appear
to rise because richer people buy new varieties of
a commodity that has superior attributes that are
not captured in standard measurement.
Although tastes may differ, it is the reserva-
tion prices themselves and not the causes of the
differences that have consequence for economic
allocation. Differences in talents are behind
much of occupational choice where the theory
of comparative advantage is central. Individuals
specialize in skills because the fixed costs of
skill acquisition is only loosely linked to the
levels of utilization. It pays for a worker to learn