nificance of even the more favorable measure
is qualified. That is partly because the
demographic changes that supported laborforce
growth also made for a faster increase
of households than of population, so to some
degree expenses per head increased with income
per head.' It is qualified also to the
extent that women felt forced to take paid
work to offset the slower rise or actual decline
of their husbands' real earnings; to the
extent that the proportion of persons living
in pretransfer poverty has been tending to
rise since 1968; to the extent that transfer
incomes became a more important part of
aggregate disposable income- to the disadvantage
of income earners; and to the extent
that the rise of noncash compensation
reduced worker's discretionary take-home
pay. The upshot is that in recent years, the
average real cash incomes of workers have,
depending on the measure, almost ceased to
rise or begun to fall. The same is true of the
average real total income of families, supported
as that has been by transfer incomes
and by the entry of second workers. The
presumption is that the real earned income
of representative single worker families, still
more their cash income, has definitely
declined."
The slowdowns in the growth rates of
productivity, annual wages, and household
incomes are, moreover, not the only disturbing
elements in our economic situation. They
are accompanied by rapid and volatile inflation
which redistributes income and wealth
in arbitrary and confusing ways. Taken together,
these developments have disappointed
peoples' expectations; they have
robbed many people of the fruits of earlier
work and saving, and made almost everyone
unsure or fearful about their future.
These developments stand in the background
of the current discontent with the
operation of our mixed economy. They have
led to a blacklash against the earlier recoil
from productivity growth. This blacklashperhaps
justifiably, perhaps not-raises
sharply the issue of maintaining a steady
balance between the productivity growth
that supports the rise of earned incomes and
the pursuit of other vitally important social
goals.
V
Our attitudes towards that issue would be
clearer if we could know to what extent the
current productivity retardation is actually
due to the workings of our mixed economy
or to its past and current attempts to raise
social welfare through government actions.
Many believe that the welfare and regulatory
programs are heavily implicated both
in direct ways and because of their arguably
plausible connection with the onset and persistence
of an erratic and accelerating inflation.
There is a concomitant fear that the
welfare and regulatory programs may be a
serious drag on future productivity growth.
Opposition to these programs, is, therefore,
rising. True, if future productivity growth is
slow for whatever reasons, people will be
less willing than they might otherwise be to
bear the cost of pursuing alternative welfare
goals. But if that pursuit were actually a
significant cause of slower growth, the reluctance
would be still stronger, as it then
should be.
The causes of the current retardation,
however, remain cloudy. A portion of the
slowdown is, by general agreement, due to a
virtual cessation of the shift of workers from
small-scale inefficient farming and from
self-employment in petty trade to higher
productivity occupations in larger- scale
urban enterprise. A portion too is assignable
to the massive entry of workers-youth and
women-since the mid-1960's. Finally, a
small part of the retardation is attributable
to the diversion of resources to comply with
environmental regulation and safety requirements
in ways that do not register in
measured output, though, of course, they
"'Manifestly, some of the faster increase of households
than of population was the result of changing
tastes, rising incomes, and better provision for old
people through Social Security. It was, therefore, the
way in which people chose to spend income to best
advantage. But part of the fast increase of households
was due to the appearance of large cohorts of young
adults who were reaching an age when the establishment
of independent households was normal, and, in
that sense, the extra expense of separate households
was imposed on them.
"See Appendix Table 2.