move toward one of these steady states,
but which one depends on the specifics of
the wage pattern matrix and the initial
conditions. Contrary to some pessimistic
warnings, there is nro arithmetic compulsion
that makes the whole system gravitate
in the direction of its most inflationary
sectors. The ultimate steady state inflation
will be at most that of the market
with the highest initial inflation rate, and
at least that of the market with the lowest
initial inflation rate. It need not be equal
to the average inflation rate at the beginning,
but may be either greater or
smaller. Third, the adjustment paths are
likely to contain cyclical conmponents,
damped or at most of constant amplitude,
and during adjustments both individual
and average wage movements may diverge
substantially in both directions from
their ultimate steady state value. Fourth,
since wage decisions and negotiations
occur infrequently, relative wage adjustments
involve a lot of catching up and
leap-frogging, and probably take a long
time. I have sketched the formal properties
of a disaggregated wage pattern system
of this kind simply to stress again the
vast simplification of the one-market
myth.
A system in which only relative magnitudes
matter has only a neutral equilibrium,
from which it can be permanently
displaced by random shocks. Even when a
market is in equilibrium, it may outdo the
recent wage increases in related markets. A
shock of this kind, even though it is not
repeated, raises permanently the steady
state inflation rate. This is true cost-push
-inflation generated neither by previous
inflation nor by current excess demand.
Shocks, of course, may be negative as well
as positive. For example, upward pushes
arising from adjustments in relative wage
levels will be reversed when those adjustments
are completed.
To the extent that one man's reference
wages are another man's wages, there is
something arbitrary and conventional,
indeterminate and unstable, in the process
of wage setting. In the same current market
circumstances, the reference pattern
might be 8 percent per year or 3 percent
per year or zero, depending on the historical
prelude. Market conditions, unemployment
and vacancies and their distributions,
shape history and alter reference
patterns. But accidental circumstances
affecting stragetic wage settlements
also cast a long shadow.
Price inflation, as previously observed,
is a neutral method of making arbitrary
money wage paths conform to the realities
of productivity growth, neutral in preserving
the structure of relative wages.
If expansion of aggregate demand brings
both more inflation and more employment,
there need be no mystery why unemployed
workers accept the new jobs,
or why employed workers do not vacate
theirs. They need not be victims of ignorance
or inflation illusion. They genuinely
want more work at feasible real wages,
and they also want to maintain the relative
status they regard as proper and just.
Guideposts could be in principle the
functional equivalent of inflation, a neutral
method of reconciling wage and productivity
paths. The trick is to find a
formula for mutual deescalation which
does not offend conceptions of relative
equity. No one has devised a way of
controlling average wage rates without
intervening in the competitive struggle
over relative wages. Inflation lets this
struggle proceed and blindly, impartially,
impersonally, and nonpolitically scales
down all its outcomes. There are worse
methods of resolving grotup rivalries and
social conflict.
V. The Role of Monopoly Power
Probably the most popular explanation
of the inflationary bias of the economy is
concentration of economic power in large
corporations and unions. These powerful