responds to more than 10 percent of GNP,38
reflects obsolescence, i.e., a result of technological
progress. Such a statement needs
to be reinterpreted for our purpose. If the
service lives of capital goods were to be
prolonged significantly, then, unless the
equipment-goods and the construction
industry were to raise their costs and selling
prices for the sake of durability, the
users of capital goods would be spending
more on repairs and maintenance. The
question here is: how much more? This, I
believe, has remained an unexplored question
which would deserve a research effort.
In the absence of dependable information,
I suggest two guidelines for the present
purpose. I will base my subsequent reasoning
more on the second than on the
first of these.
1) By assuming that total capital consumption
typically amounts to about 12
percent as expressed in relation to private
GNP, and by charging one-fourth of this to
technological advance for obsolescence, one
is unlikely to overcharge the progressaccount.
One way of visualizing the implications
of a charge of such size-3 percent
of private GNP-is to note that it is
consistent with the hypothesis that in
order to arrive at a doubling of the useful
service lives, the users of capital goods
would have to increase their present expenditures
on current repairs and maintenance
by the equivalent of about 50
percent of what would then become their
reduced current capital-consumption cost.39
For structures which represent a very
weighty component of the capital stock,
this is quite likely to be an overstatement
of the costs of extending the now usual service
lives, hence an understatement of the
costs to be set against technological advance
and against the rise of living standards
in which it expresses itself. The same
may be true of some types of equipment,
but there undoubtedly exist types for
which these numerical assumptions understate
the costs of the extension of service
life, and thus overstate the cost of progress.
On the whole, charging 3 percent of private
GNP is unlikely to err (or to err much) on
the high side of costs, and this charge
might well err on the low side. As long as
we try not to overcharge we may add
merely 1 percent of the private GNP for
unrecorded costs other than obsolescence,
i.e., for the other costs listed in Appendix C.
We arrive at 4 percent of private GNP for
what I consider a "moderate" estimate of
the unrecorded costs, though I will not
build much on this figure.
2) An immoderate overstatement of the
obsolescence-cost of progress would be
obtained by charging to progress the
entire capital-consumption-i.e., about 12
percent of private GNP-and by adding 2
38 From 1919 to 1955 Kuznets' capital consumption
allowances move in the range from 10.9 to 15.1 in relation
to GNP (constant prices); at the beginning and
also at the end of the period the figure was almost precisely
in the middle of the range. This implies Kuznets'
Variant III of output. Using other Variants of Kuznets,
wider ranges are found for movements of the depreciation
ratio in the region above 10 percent. See Kuznets'
Appendix A, Table R-2, p. 487.
The capital-consumption ratio implied in the Capital
Stock Study of the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Office of Business Economics seems to be somewhat
smaller than Kuznets', but also typically somewhat
higher than 10 percent. See for this e.g. Robert C. Wasson'
s articles in the Survey of Current Business, particularly
in the December 1966 and in the February 1969
issue. However, proper interpretation of the relationships
here considered requires also use of computer
output available from Mr. Wasson's office. My evaluation
implies a reasonable "blowing up" of the Commerce
Capital Stock Study depreciation figures, in view of the
fact that the figures of the Study relate only to the
business sector including farms, i.e., exclude the residential
sector as well as general government. I was using
the Capital Stock Study's straight-line depreciation
estimates and was using them on "Cost 1" basis. This
cost-basis makes the method of deflating comparable to
that applied to the Commerce estimates of the GNP.
39 Any hypothesis of this kind has the realistic impli-
cation that in a progressive economy the "representa-
tive" physical asset is produced in such a way as to be
in some sense "too durable." This has several reasons,
one of which presumably is that lack of durability is
not the only unfavorable property of a "flimsy object."