To deal with implicit labor contracts
covering the long tenures that are typical in
U.S. industry, it is necessary to make the
currently out-of-fashion distinction between
risk and uncertainty. Most of the mathemati-
cal modeling of implicit contracts has as-
sumed that workers and firms base their
agreements on a known probability distribu-
tion (presumably commonly held) of the rel-
evant variables, most importantly the mar-
ginal revenue product of labor or some
related variable. The distribution of the mean
expected bilateral monopoly rents from con-
tinuity is decided at the beginning of the
contract on the basis of the known distribu-
tion of possible economic environments that
will be faced over the life of the contract,
and the contract then specifies the behavior
of wages (and in some cases employment) as
the realization of that distribution occurs.
The wage is either rigid or changes sluggishly
in the face of these changing realizations.
But recent research on the surprisingly long
lengths of job tenure in the United States
casts doubt on the usefulness and sufficiency
of this assumption. Robert Hall (1980) has
estimated that, in 1973, half of all work in
America was done on jobs whose completed
tenures were fifteen years or more. And for
men alone the relevant completed job tenure
was twenty-five years! Douglas Wolf and
Frank Levy (1984) reached very similar con-
clusions on the basis of a 1979 survey. The
contracts, rules-of-behavior, and social con-
ventions that make possible such long associ-
ations must be such as to allow wages to
adjust appropriately in response to changes
in circumstances whose probability of occur-
rence could not be determined in advance. In
other words, the informal agreements which
make possible long-term association between
workers and employers must take into
account Knightian uncertainty about future
possible outcomes. With respect to many of
possible states of the world, over such a long
period of time, there is no basis in past
statistical regularities for knowing the distri-
bution. As William Nordhaus (1976) points
out, contracts must take account of changes
in the economic climate (i.e., when the
parameters of the distribution shift) as well
as changes in the economic weather (i.e., as
realizations of the known distribution).
Most of the possible long-term changes to
be faced by firms and workers do not result
from the cyclical variance of aggregates, like
national income and output, but from
changes in relative variables potentially re-
sponding to a bewildering permutation of
possibilities. Seen in 1973, what were the
rationally expected probabilities of the 1974
and 1979 oil price increases, the introduction
and growth of personal computers, or the
Chrysler brush with bankruptcy? Compared
to workers, firms may indeed be relatively
risk neutral to temporary changes in income
following some known distribution. But no
firm is so risk neutral and has such unlimited
access to capital as to enter upon or honor
contacts specifying rigid wages or some fixed
function of wages on employment over very
long periods,6 when no rational basis exists
for specifying the distribution of outcomes.
Some of the modern wage literature (for
example, Hall and David Lilien, 1979; San-
ford Grossman and Oliver Hart, 1981) mod-
els a contract with a "lump-sum" distribu-
tion of the rents-that is, an amount to be
paid the workers regardless of unemploy-
ment status-and a marginal compensation,
paid when the worker is employed and itself
an agreed upon increasing function of the
level of labor input. Employers then de-
termine employment by maximizing profits
in the light of the marginal compensation
schedule. In these approaches, the climatic
changes to which I refer would be an occa-
sion for changing the basic lump sum distri-
bution of the rents.
A workable distinction can thus be made
between those contract provisions which deal
with wages in the face of moderate and
temporary changes in the marginal product
of labor that are perceived as the realization
of a known probability distribution and those
provisions which deal with climatic and per-
manent changes, the probability of whose