able income above $250,000 would accomplish
this objective (see Plan II, Table 7).49
Another change to increase progressivity
would be to increase the earned-income
credit for low-income families. Today, the
credit is the same for all families, regardless
of the number of children. The credit would
be more effective in combatting poverty if it
increased with family size. For example, the
current 14-percent credit could be maintained
for families with one child and four
percentage points, or roughly $250, could be
added for each additional child. With this
modification, the earned income credit would
increase the likelihood that a family with
several children could earn enough to remain
outside the welfare system.
Table 8 reports the average effective federal
income tax rates by population deciles
under the schedule that restores overall progressivity
to 1977 levels (Plan II) and under
the schedule that matches 1990 distribution
with a broadened base (Plan I). The average
effective rates in Plan II are lower than those
under present law in the bottom nine deciles
and higher in the top decile. For the top 1
percent of the family units, the average effective
rate rises from 21 percent to 30 percent,
which cannot be regarded as punitive.
I recognize that few people would go as
far as I would in broadening the tax base.
But that does not mean that the objective of
greater progressivity must be abandoned.
Even if there were no additional base-broadening
between now and 1990, the same degree
of progressivity that prevailed in 1977
could be achieved with rates ranging from 7
percent at the bottom to 56 percent at the
top.
Conclusion
I conclude that there is no good reason for
the disenchantment of economists with the
income tax. The main rival of the income tax
-the consumption expenditure tax- is distinctly
inferior on theoretical as well as practical
grounds. The endowment or lifetime
perspective of the expenditure tax is indefensible
in a world of financial, political, and
family instability. The transition problems in
moving from an income tax to an expenditure
tax are extremely difficult. There is also
a danger that the substitution of an expenditure
tax for the income tax would greatly
increase the concentration of wealth. Moreover,
the public regards income, not expenditure,
as the best index of ability to pay,
and it would be unwise to abandon this
familiar and widely approved basis of taxation.

The 1986 reforms have greatly improved
the federal income tax by broadening the
base and lowering rates. But the progressivity
of the federal tax system has been declining
for the last two decades. As a result, the
distribution of before-tax income, which has
been growing more unequal in the 1980s, has
become even more unequal on an after-tax
basis. I have suggested that the goal of tax
policy should be to restore the progressivity
of the income tax at least to its level in the
mid-1970s.
The 1986 tax reform went a long way
toward comprehensive income taxation, but
much more can be done to enlarge the tax
base and to remove the preferences for capital
income. Among the more urgent basebroadening
reforms are the inclusion in taxable
income of capital gains transferred by
gift or at death, elimination of the tax exemption
for newly issued state-local securities,
taxation of employee fringe benefits,
treatment of Social Security benefits like private
pensions, reduction of the tax subsidy
for home owners, pruning of the personal
deductions, and withholding on interest and
dividends. To correct the measurement of
capital income for inflation, asset prices
should be adjusted for changing prices in
order to convert nominal to real incomes for
tax purposes. The two-earner deduction and
income averaging should be restored to reduce
the marriage penalty and equalize the
treatment of fluctuating and stable incomes.
49 Between 1977 and 1990 the weight of the relatively
regressive payroll tax in federal revenues increased.
Thus, the income tax must be more progressive in 1990
than it was in 1977 to restore overall progressivity to its
1977 level.