such a theory than has any other
economist in the more-or-less orthodox
tradition. Outside that tradition, we can
turn to the Marxian literature.
Here, of course, I am harking back to a
major plea of the early institutionalists.
Veblen asked long ago, in the title of one
of his papers, "Why Is Economics Not
an Evolutionary Science?," and Wesley
Mitchell urged the need for a comprehensive
theory of economic behavior that
takes the cumulative change of institutions
as its chief concern. The institutionalists
themselves did not develop such a comprehensive
and evolutionary theory. While
the classical writers did have the elements
of a dynamic system-what Baumol
once referred to as the "magnificent
dynamics" of the classical school-they
theorized on the assumption of a fixed
set of social and economic institutions. As
Schumpeter put it, "the classics reasoned
in terms of a particular historical situation
which they uncritically idealized and from
which they uncritically generalized" (1947,
p. 75).
As for contemporary economists in the
neoclassical tradition, they, like their predecessors,
seem to be afraid to ask the
really big questions about the economic
aspects of society questions which, because
they are big, must be concerned with
the changing institutional fabric. Some exception
to this generalization should be
made for the considerable effort that has
gone into the study of the underdeveloped
parts of the world. Here economists have
not been able to ignore the interaction of
the institutional environment and economic
behavior, and increasing attention
has come to be paid to the conditions necessary
for one or another kind of change
in that environment. I might add here that
I continue to be impressed by the fact that
in general economists in the advanced
countries seem to be prepared to be more
institutional in dealing with other parts of
the world than they are in studying the
particular societies in which they live and
do most of their work.20
Might the following conceptual framework
provide a basis for a more systematic
study of the dynamic interaction of economic
behavior and the institutional
framework? At the most basic level, a society
is composed of individual human
beings. These individuals are members of
households. The larger number of them
sell the factor services they control to producing
units ("firms" for short); and those
who sell labor services must physically
participate in the production process. A
flow of newly produced goods and services
results. The distribution of these goods and
services among potential claimants depends
on much more than the operation
of "impersonal market forces." It reflects a
complex of institutional arrangements,
which include, among other things, the distribution
of power among different groups
to influence particular commodity and factor
markets, both directly and through
government, how the ownership of wealth
is distributed and for whose benefit it is
used, the tax structure and network of
government regulations that emerge from
the political process, and the total and distribution
of net claims by the rest of the
world against domestic output.
Individuals not only are members of
households and suppliers of input services
to producing units (which may be governmental
as well as private), but they are also
part of a political process which, while
20 Lance Davis and Douglass North have recently set  forth a tentative and limited "theory of institutional  change" and have applied the resulting modcl to show  how a range of economic needs and opportunities have  led to new institutional arrangements in the American  economy. They are frank in setting forth some of the
limitations of their model, and Lhere is a good deal in  their approach with which I should quarrel; but their  work is clearly a step in the right direction. Incidentally,  this particular approach to economic history tends to  run counter to the recent quantitative emphasis in that  field. Clearly we need to have both types of historical  work.