LUCAS: MACROECONOMIC PRIORITIES
minus the inflation rate) and the change in the
relative price of oil. The coefficients of an invertible
vector autoregression are estimated,
subject to several restrictions. This procedure
yields time series of estimated shocks g t and
decompositions of the variance of each of the
five variables into the fractions "explained" by
the most recent k values of each of the five
shocks.
Shapiro and Watson apply a variety of theoretical
principles to the interpretation of
their estimates. They do not consistently follow
the general-equilibrium practice of interpreting
all shocks as shifts in preferences,
technologies, or the behavior of policy variables,
but they have in mind some kind of
monetary growth model that does not have a
long-run Phillips curve.6 Real variables, in
the long run, are determined by real factors
only. Nominal shocks can affect real variables
and relative prices in the short run but not in
the long run. This idea is not tested: Long-run
neutrality is imposed on the statistical model.
In return it becomes possible to estimate separately
the importance of nominal shocks to
the short- and medium-run variability of output,
hours, and real interest rates.7
In the five-variable scheme that Shapiro and
Watson use, there are two nominal variablesthe
inflation rate and the nominal interest rateand
three real ones-output, hours, and the
relative price of oil. They assume as well five
shocks, two of which are nominal in the sense
of having no effect on real variables in the long
run. They are not able to measure the effects of
the two dimensions of nominal instability separately.
The other three shocks are taken to be
real. The assumed exogeneity of oil price
shocks plus a long-run neutrality hypothesis on
hours are used to estimate the importance of
three distinct real shocks. This aspect of their
identification seems to me questionable, and in
any case it is of an entirely different nature from
the neutrality of nominal shocks. I will just
lump the effects of the real shocks together, as
6 To remove any doubt on the latter point, they quote
from Milton Friedman's (1968) Presidential Address.
7 A similar, and similarly motivated, identification pro-
cedure was used in Olivier J. Blanchard and Danny Quah
(1989). Thomas J. Sargent and Christopher A. Sims (1977)
is a predecessor in spirit, if not in detail.
TABLE 1-PERCENTAGE OF VARIANCE DUE TO NOMINAL
SHOCKS AT DIFFERENT FORECAST HORIZONS
Quarter Output Hours Inflation Interest rate
1 28 36 89 83
4 28 40 82 71
8 20 31 82 72
12 17 27 84 74
20 12 20 86 79
36 8 12 89 85
x0 0 0 94 94
Shapiro and Watson do with the two nominal
shocks, and interpret their paper as partitioning
the variance of output and hours into nominal
and real sources. The resulting Table 1 is a
condensation of their Table 2.
The two zeroes for output and hours in the
last, long-run, row of Table 1 are there by the
definition of a nominal shock. But the two 94-
percent entries in this row for inflation and the
nominal interest rate could have come out any
way. I take the fact that these values are so close
to 1 as a confirmation of Shapiro and Watson's
procedure for identifying nominal shocks. According
to Table 1, these nominal shocks have
accounted for something less than 30 percent of
short-run production variability in the postwar
United States. This effect decays slowly, with
no change after one year, a reduction to 20
percent after two years, and so on.
One can ask whether a better estimate of the
importance of nominal shocks could have obtained
by using Ml or some other observable
measure of monetary shocks. Many studies
have proceeded in this more direct way,8 and
much has been learned, but in the end one does
not know whether the importance of monetary
shocks has been estimated or just the importance
of a particular, possibly very defective,
measure of them. Information on future prices is
conveyed to people by changes in monetary
aggregates, of course, but it is also conveyed by
interest-rate and exchange-rate movements, by
changes in the fiscal situation that may lead to
tighter or easier money later on, by changes in
financial regulations, by statements of influential
people, and by many other factors. Shapiro
and Watson's method bypasses these hard
8 For example, Lawrence J. Christiano, et al. (1996).
VOL. 93 NO. 1
5