processing get cheaper. But some of the
cases of missing markets really go much
deeper. The fact that distant future generations
can not participate directly in the
markets for nonrenewable resources will not
be remedied by improvements in communication.
Nor are the residents of densely
populated areas ever likely to be able to
dicker effectively with the dozens or hundreds
of sources of barely traceable pollutants
whose health effects, if any, cumulate
over many years.

There is a large element of Rohrschach
test in the way each of us responds to this
tension. Some of us see the Smithian virtues
as a needle in a haystack, as an island of
measure zero in a sea of imperfections.
Others see all the potential sources of
market failure as so many fleas on the thick
hide of an ox, requiring only an occasional
flick of the tail to be brushed away. A
hopeless eclectic without any strength of
character, like me, has a terrible time of it.
If I may invoke the names of two of my
most awesome predecessors as President of
this Association, I need only listen to Milton
Friedman talk for a minute and my mind
floods with thoughts of increasing returns to
scale, oligopolistic interdependence, consumer
ignorance, environmental pollution,
intergenerational inequity, and on and on.
There is almost no cure for it, except to
listen for a minute to John Kenneth
Galbraith, in which case all I can think of
are the discipline of competition, the large
number of substitutes for any commodity,
the stupidities of regulation, the Pareto optimality
of Walrasian equilibrium, the importance
of decentralizing decision making to
where the knowledge is, and on and on.
Sometimes I think it is only my weakness of
character that keeps me from making obvious
errors.

The critics of the mainstream tradition
are mistaken when they attribute to it a
built-in Panglossian attitude toward the
capitalist economy. The tradition has provided
both the foundations for a belief in
the efficiency of market allocations and the
tools for a powerful critique. Economic
analysis by itself has no way of choosing
between them; and the immediate prospects
for an empirically based model of a whole
economy, capable of measuring our actual
"distance" from the contract curve, are
mighty slim. The missing link has to be a
matter of judgment-the Rohrschach test
I spoke of a minute ago. For every Dr.
Pangloss who makes the ink blot out to be
of surpassing beauty, give or take a few
minor deviations-the second-best of all
possible worlds, you might say-there is a
Candide to whom it looks a lot like an ink
blot. Maybe there are more Panglosses than
Candides. But that was true in Voltaire's
time too-just before the French Revolution,
by the way-and has more to do with
the state of society than with the nature of
economics.

The tension between market efficiency
and market failure is especially pointed in
discussions of the working of the labor
market, for obvious reasons. The labor
market connects quickly with everything
else in the economy and its performance
matters more directly for most people than
that of any other market. Moreover, the
labor market's own special pathology, unemployment,
is particularly visible, particularly
unsettling, and particularly frustrating.
The fuse leading from theory to policy in
this field is short, and has been known to
produce both heat and light throughout
much of the history of economics.
Contemporary macro-economic theory,
though apparently full of technical novelties,
has revived many of the old questions
in only slightly different form. One of the
points I want to make is that underneath the
theoretical innovations-some of which are
interesting and important the basic controversial
issues that come to the surface are
the same ones that occupied earlier literature.
The most important among them is
really the old tension between market
efficiency and market failure. Should one
think of the labor market as mostly clearing,
or at worst in the process of quick return to
market-clearing equilibrium? Or should one
think of it as mostly in disequilibrium, with
transactions habitually taking place at nonmarket-
clearing wages? In that case presumably
the wage structure is either not
receiving any strong signals to make it