cycle obsolete?" (see Martin Bronfenbrenner,
editor). No one seemed to question the
greater postwar stability of all Western economies-
nor is this surprising when one recalls
that around that time business cycle specialists
felt so threatened by the new-found stability that
they were arguing for redefining business cycles
as fluctuations in the rate of growth rather than
in the level of output.
It was recognized that the reduced severity of
fluctuations might in part reflect structural
changes in the economy and the effect of stronger
built-in stabilizers, inspired, of course, by
the Keynesian analysis. Furthermore, the greater
stability in the United States, and in other industrialized
countries, are obviously not independent
events. Still, at least as of the time of that
conference, there seemed to be little question
and some evidence that part of the credit for the
greater stability should go to the conscious and
on balance, successful endeavor at stabilizing
the economy.
V. The Case of Supply Shocks and the
1974-76 Episode
A. Was the 1974 Depression Due to Errors of
Commission or Omission?
In pointing out our relative postwar stability
and the qualified success of stabilization policies,
I have carefully defined the postwar period
as ending somewhere in 1973. What has happened
since that has so tarnished the reputation
of economists? In facing this problem, the first
question that needs to be raised is whether the
recent combination of unprecedented rates of
inflation as well as unemployment must be
traced to crimes of commission or omission. Did
our monetary and fiscal stabilization policies
misfire, or did we instead fail to use them?
We may begin by establishing one point that
has been blurred by monetarists' blanket indictments
of recent monetary policy: the virulent
explosion that raised the four-quarter rate of
inflation from about 4 percent in 1972 to 6.5
percent by the third quarter of 1973, to 11.5
percent in 1974 with a peak quarterly rate of
13.5, can in no way be traced to an excessive, or
to a disorderly, growth of the money supply. As
already mentioned, the average rate of money
growth from the beginning of 1970 to the second
half of 1974 was close to 7 percent. To be sure,
this was a high rate and could be expected sooner
or later to generate an undesirably high inflation
-but how high? Under any reasonable assumption
one cannot arrive at a figure much above 6
percent. This might explain what happened up to
the fall of 1973, but not from the third quarter
of 1973 to the end of 1974, which is the really
troublesome period. Similarly, as was indicated
above, the growth of money was reasonably
smooth over this period, smoother than at any
other time in the postwar period, staying within
a 2 percent band. Hence, the debacle of 1974
can just not be traced to an erratic behavior of
money resulting from a misguided attempt at
stabilization.
Should one then conclude that the catastrophe
resulted from too slavish an adherence to a stable
growth rate, forsaking the opportunity to use
monetary policy to stabilize the economy? In
one sense, the answer to this question must in
my view be in the affirmative. There is ample
ground for holding that the rapid contraction that
set in toward the end of 1974, on the heels of a
slow decline in the previous three quarters, and
which drove unemployment to its 9 percent
peak, was largely the result of the astronomic
rise in interest rates around the middle of the
year. That rise in turn was the unavoidable result
of the Fed's stubborn refusal to accommodate,
to an adequate extent, the exogenous inflationary
shock due to oil, by letting the money supply
growth exceed the 6 percent rate announced at
the beginning of the year. And this despite repeated
warnings about that unavoidable result
(see, for example, the author 1974).
Monetarists have suggested that the sharp
recession was not the result of too slow a monetary
growth throughout the year, but instead of
the deceleration that took place in the last half of
1974, and early 1975. But this explanation just
does not stand up to the facts. The fall in the
quarterly growth of money in the third and fourth
quarters was puny, especially on the basis of