economists is a doctrine that might be
called the Immaculate Conception of the
Indifference Curve, that is, that tastes are
simply given, and that we cannot inquire
into the process by which they are
formed. This doctrine is literally "for the
birds," whose tastes are largely created
for them by their genetic structures, and
can therefore be treated as a constant in
the dynamics of bird societies. In human
society, however, the genetic component
of tastes is very small indeed. We start off
with a liking for milk, warmth, and dryness
and a dislike for being hungry, cold,
and wet, and we do have certain latent
drives which may guide the formation of
later preferences in matters of sex, occupation,
or politics, but by far and away
the largest part of human preferences are
learned, again by means of a mutation-selection
process. It was, incidentally, Veblen'
s principal, and still largely unrecognized,
contribution to formal economic
theory, to point out that we cannot assume
that tastes are given in any dynamic
theory, in the sense that in dynamics we
cannot afford to neglect the processes by
which cultures are created and by which
preferences are learned.
I am prepared indeed to go much further
and to say that no science of any
kind can be divorced from ethical considerations,
as defined above. The propositions
of science are no more immaculately
conceived than the preferences of individuals.
Science is a human learning process
wlhich arises in certain subcultures in
human society and not in others, and a
subculture as we have seen is a group of
people defined by the acceptance of certain
common values, that is, an ethic
which permits extensive communication
among them.
The scientific subculture is no exception
to this rule. It is characterized by a strong
common value system. A high value, for
instance, is placed on veracity, on curios-  ity, on measurement, on quantification, on
careful observation and experiment, and
on objectivity. Without this common
value structure the epistemological process
of science would not have arisen; indeed
it did not arise in certain societies
where conditions might otherwise have
been favorable but where some essential
common values of the scientific subcultures
did not exist. The question as to exactly
what values and ethical propositions
are essential to the scientific subculture
may be in some dispute. The fact that
there are such values cannot be disputed.
It is indeed one of the most perplexing
questions in intellectual history as to why
the scientific subculture developed in the
time and place that it did in Western Europe.
The common values that are prerequisite
to it are rather rare among human
subcultures. The common values, for instance,
of the military or the people that
run the international system are quite different
from those of science. In this sense,
therefore, science has an essential ethical
basis.
This means that even the epistemological
content of science, that is, what scientists
think they know, has an ethical component.
The proposition, for instance, that
water consists of two molecules of hydrogen
and one of oxygen is not usually
thought of as a proposition with high ethical
content. Nevertheless, any student in
chemistry who decides that he prefers to
think of hydrogen as dephlogisticated
water will soon find out that chemistry is
not just a matter of personal taste. The
fact that there is no dispute going on
about any particular scientific proposition
does not mean to say that it is a matter of
taste; it simply means that the dispute
about it has been resolved through the application
of certain common values and
ethical presuppositions.
There is however a fundamental sense
in which the epistemological process even