trated in a small number of IT-using industries,
while Stiroh (2000) shows that aggregate ALP
growth can be attributed to productivity growth
in IT-producing and IT-using industries. The
next priority is to trace the increase in aggregate
TFP growth to its sources in individual indus-
tries. Jorgenson and Stiroh (2000a, 2000b)
present the appropriate methodology and pre-
liminary results.
IV. Economics on Internet Time
The steadily rising importance of information
technology has created new research opportuni-
ties in all areas of economics. Economic histo-
rians, led by Chandler (2000) and Paul A. David
(2000),41 have placed the information age in
historical context. The Solow (1987) Paradox,
that we see computers everywhere but in the
productivity statistics,42 has provided a point of
departure. Since computers have now left an
indelible imprint on the productivity statistics,
the remaining issue is: Does the breathtaking
speed of technological change in semiconduc-
tors differentiate this resurgence from previous
periods of rapid growth?
Capital and labor markets have been severely
impacted by information technology. Enormous
uncertainty surrounds the relationship between
equity valuations and future growth prospects
of the American economy.43 One theory at-
tributes rising valuations of equities since the
growth acceleration began in 1995 to the accu-
mulation of intangible assets, such as intellec-
tual property and organizational capital. An
alternative theory treats the high valuations of
technology stocks as a bubble that burst during
the year 2000.
The behavior of labor markets also poses
important puzzles. Widening wage differentials
between workers with more and less education
has been attributed to computerization of the
workplace. A possible explanation could be that
high-skilled workers are complementary to IT,
while low-skilled workers are substitutable. An
alternative explanation is that technical change
associated with IT is skill biased and increases
the wages of high-skilled workers relative to
low-skilled workers.44
Finally, information technology is altering
product markets and business organizations, as
attested by the large and growing business lit-
erature,45 but a fully satisfactory model of the
semiconductor industry remains to be devel-
oped.46 Such a model would derive the demand
for semiconductors from investment in informa-
tion technology in response to rapidly falling IT
prices. An important objective is to determine
the product cycle for successive generations of
new semiconductors endogenously.
The semiconductor industry and the informa-
tion technology industries are global in their
scope with an elaborate international division of
labor.47 This poses important questions about
the American growth resurgence. Where is the
evidence of a new economy in other leading
industrialized countries? An important explana-
tion is the absence of constant quality price
indexes for semiconductors and information
technology in national accounting systems out-
side the U.S.48 Another conundrum is that
several important participants-Korea, Malay-
sia, Singapore, and Taiwan-are "newly indus-
trializing" economies. What does this portend
for developing countries like China and India?
As policy makers attempt to fill the widening
gaps between the information required for
sound policy and the available data, the