major source of calories has been grain-of the
order of 75 to 80 percent (Bennett, 1976 p. 206).
Until the early nineteenth century the serious
bottleneck in the production of grain was harvesting.
The plow was introduced several millennia
before, and it saved labor, but at a time of
the year when labor was not scarce. Plowing
could be done over an extended period of time,
but harvesting in most areas had to be done in a
brief period to prevent the crop being harmed or
destroyed by wind, rain, or frost.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century
grain was harvested by the same methods as in
the fourteenth century and probably much earlier-
the sickle, the scythe, and the cradle. T'he
invention and introduction of the reaper in
America in the second quarter of the nineteenth
century changed all that. The reaper was soon
followed by the binder, which was a reaper with
an attachment that brought the grain straw together
in a bundle and tied it with twine. The
binder was complemented by the thresher that
saved a great deal of labor, though at a time less
critical than the savings made possible by the
reaper and binder. In turn the binder and
thresher were largely replaced by the combine,
but not until well into the twentieth century.
Many other machines and tools were part of
the mechanical revolution. Very important
was harnessing the internal combustion engine
to create the tractor. The labor savings of
the mechanical revolution were enormous. It
is estimated that the direct labor input used to
produce a ton of grain in the United States
declined by 70 percent in the nineteenth century
(Martin R. Cooper et al., 1947). Consequently
in the developed countries after the
mid-nineteenth century the transfer of labor
from agriculture to nonagricultural pursuits
was more likely limited by the rate of growth
of nonagricultural employment than by the
labor requirements of agriculture.
V. Land Was Not the Scarce Resource
While today many give emphasis to the limited
supply of land of good quality as a major
impediment to further increases in food production,
throughout nearly all of human history
land has not been an important factor limiting
production. It had to have been something else
when the world's population was 500 million,
as it was in the sixteenth century, or perhaps
even when the population first reached one billion,
early in the nineteenth century. Given the
state of knowledge that existed until quite recently,
the primary limiting factor was labor.
Labor limited the amount of food that could be
produced by a family and, as noted, for much of
human history, farm families were barely able
to produce enough for their own consumption
with little surplus for trade with others. Until
quite recently this surplus was hardly more than
a quarter or a fifth of what they produced. A
good indicator that land was not the limiting
factor is that until the beginning of the nineteenth
century yields were calculated per unit of
seed, not per unit of land (Slicher van Bath,
1963).
Ester Boserup (1965) makes a convincing
case that labor and not land was the limiting
factor in agricultural output until quite recently.
She showed how farmers adapted to increasing
population by modifying the ways that land was
utilized, shifting from slash and burn and long
fallow to shorter periods of fallow and in Western
Europe eliminating fallow entirely. They
found ways other than fallow to maintain the
fertility of the soil-the use of manure and
legumes, for example. These changes were the
result of new knowledge, knowledge largely
derived from experience of the farmers themselves
and were a response to the growing population
and the need to expand food production.
VI. The Increased Role of Knowledge
As noted, the enormous increase in the
world's output over the past two centuries has
been due in large part to the advancement of
knowledge combined with the increase in human
resources, both in number and capabilities,
and savings translated into physical capital. We
do not have more natural resources than existed
in the distant past, yet output has increased
many fold. What is the source of the increased
knowledge? Two factors have been importantone
is simply the growth of population and the
other is that rising real per capita incomes have
made it possible for specialization in the production
of knowledge and for devoting a significant
share of our resources to that effort.
Michael Kremer (1993) makes a convincing
case for the conclusion that a larger population