This does not, however, negate an impor-
tant implication of the question raised by
Buchanan and others that public servants
would tend to have their own objective
functions; I would dissociate that point from
the further claim, with which it has come
mixed, that these objective functions are
narrowly confined to the officials' own self-
interest. The important issue to emerge is
that there is something missing in a large
part of the resource-allocation literature (for
example, in proposals of algorithms for de-
centralized resource allocation, from Oscar
Lange and Abba Lerner onward) which
make do without any independent objective
function of the agents of public action. The
additional assumption of homo economicus
is not needed to point to this general
lacuna.
While this has been a somewhat ne-
glected question in social choice theory
(though partially dealt with in the related
literature on implementation), there is no
particular reason why such plurality of moti-
vations cannot be accommodated within a
social choice framework with more richly
described social states and more articulated
characterization of individual choices and
behavior. In the formulation of individual
preference used by Arrow (1951) and in
traditional social choice theory, the nature
of the objective function of each individual
is left unspecified. While there is need for
supplementary work here, this is a helpfully
permissive framework-not tied either to
ceaseless do-gooding, or to uncompromising
self-centeredness.
Even with this extended framework, tak-
ing us well beyond the homo economicus,
there remain some difficulties with the no-
tion of individual rationality used here.
There is a problem of "insufficiency" shared
by this approach to rationality with other
"instrumental" approaches to rationality,
since it does not have any condition of criti-
cal scrutiny of the objectives themselves.
Socrates might have overstated matters a bit
when he proclaimed that "the unexamined
life is not worth living," but an examination
of what kind of life one should sensibly
choose cannot really be completely irrele-
vant to rational choice.45 An "instrumental
rationalist" is a decision expert whose re-
sponse to seeing a man engaged in slicing
his toes with a blunt knife is to rush to
advise him that he should use a sharper
knife to better serve his evident objective.
This is perhaps more of a limitation in
the normative context than in using the
presumption of rationality as a device for
predicting behavior, since such critical
scrutiny might not be very widely practiced.
However, the last is not altogether clear,
since discussions and exchange, and even
political arguments, contribute to the for-
mation and revision of values. As Frank
Knight (1947 p. 280) noted, "Values are
established or validated and recognized
through discussion, an activity which is at
once social, intellectual, and creative."
There is, in fact, much force in Buchanan's
(1954a p. 120) assertion that this is a central
component of democracy ("government by
discussion") and that "individual values can
and do change in the process of decision-
making."
This issue has some real practical impor-
tance. To illustrate, in studying the fact that
famines occur in some countries but not in
others, I have tried to point to the phe-
nomenon that no major famine has ever
taken place in any country with a multiparty
democracy with regular elections and with a
reasonably free press (Sen, 1984).46 This
applies as much to the poorer democratic
countries (such as India, Zimbabwe, or
Botswana) as to the richer ones.47 This is
largely because famines, while killing mil-