improved rapidly. Hong Kong and Singapore
also became part of the East Asian "miracle"
through policies designed to encourage exporting.
Growth rates exceeded those previously
thought to represent an upper bound on
attainable performance.32
It was not until the 1980's, however, that
the importance of the differences became
unarguable. After the second oil price increase
of 1979, the worldwide recession of 1980-
1982, and the accompanying "debt crisis,"
the East Asian net importing countries (NICs)
rapidly resumed growth, whereas other heavily
indebted countries were unable to service
their debts and were hard hit by events in the
international economy. Research undertaken
in attempting to understand the impact of the
debt crisis on the developing countries made
it abundantly evident that the debt-GDP ratios
were not significantly different between the
two groups of countries. What was significantly
different was the debt-export ratios, as
the East Asian countries were able to maintain
debt servicing and resume growth because of
the greater flexibility of their economies.33 It
also emerged that, even prior to the debt crisis,
the rates of growth of inner-oriented developing
countries had not increased despite substantial
increases in their savings rates.:
This is not the place to enter into the debate
as to the factors contributing to the success of
the East Asian "tigers." For, while there is
debate about whether government intervention
in "picking the winners" was a key component
of the growth strategy, 35 all recognize that
the reversal from an import-substitution strategy,
the opening up of the economy, and the
relative uniformity of incentives across the
board were necessary, if not sufficient, for success.
Indeed, there is an irony in the fact that
the East Asian experience has stimulated some
to attempt to identify the "dynamic" factors
in exporting that are absent from production
for the domestic market. Thus, we have a complete
turnaround: in the 1950's and 1960's, the
neoclassical argument for an open trade regime
was rejected on the grounds that it was
"static" and ignored "dynamic considerations"
; in the 1990's, there appears to be widespread
agreement that the benefits of an open
trade regime are largely "dynamic" in nature,
and go well beyond the gains from trade under
"static" models of an open economy. Just as
was the case with the infant industry argument,
however, there is a question as to how to identify
and measure these "dynamic" gains.
II. How Did Economists and Researchers
Go Wrong?
The "Washington consensus" is very different
from the policy consensus that led to the
adoption of import-substitution policies in the
1950's and 1960's. While there will no doubt
be refinements in that consensus with further
experience and research, it is highly unlikely
that the ideas of the 1950's and 1960's will be
revived.
One can raise three questions about the
change in viewpoints. First, how could it be
that the economics profession, whose consensus
on the principle of comparative advantage
was at least as great as that on any other policy
issue, endorsed a highly protectionist policy
stance?36 Second, what factors contributed to
32 Chenery and Strout ( 1966) actually had a third constraint,
"absorption," which restrained growth to 8 per-
cent of GDP or less, on the grounds that more rapid growth
would not be feasible.
33 See Jeffrey Sachs (1985) for an early development
of the argument.
34The World Bank (1983) documented that this phenomenon
of a greatly increased average savings rate with
no increase in the growth rate and, therefore, a presumed
relatively sharp increase in the incremental capital output
ratio, affected most developing countries.
35 It can be argued that this is a difference between
those who see the East Asian trade policies as "free trade"
and those who see them as intervention, but of a different
type, from that under import substitution. The critical difference
is probably between those who would stress uniformity
of incentives for earning or saving foreign
exchange (and, therefore, would argue that the East Asian
NICs were arbitrarily close to a free trade regime), and
those who believe the "dynamic externalities" earlier associated
with infant industry protection really call for the
"right kind" of intervention and argue that the trade strategy
was really one of "export substitution."
36 It can also be asked why it took so long for policy
makers in countries such as India to recognize that import
substitution (and other policies) as a strategy for development
was not delivering the hoped-for results and that
a preferable path existed. That is an important question
that is well beyond the scope of this paper.