investment goods, including information technology.
Confronted by the fact that constant
quality prices of investment goods differ from
consumption goods prices, they borrow the concept
of embodiment from Solow (1960) in order
to convert investment goods output into an appropriate
form for measuring capital stock.31
Investment has two prices, one used in the measuring
output and the other used in measuring
capital stock. This inconsistency can be removed
by simply distinguishing between outputs
of consumption and investment goods, as
in the national accounts and equation (1). The
concept of embodiment can then be dropped.
Perhaps inadvertently, Greenwood et al. have
revisited the controversy accompanying the introduction
of a constant quality price index for
computers into the national accounts. They have
revived Denison's (1993) proposal to use a consumption
price index to deflate investment in
the NIPA. Denison found this appealing as a
means of avoiding the introduction of constant
quality price indexes for computers. Denison's
approach leads to a serious underestimate of
GDP growth and an overestimate of inflation.
Another limitation of the aggregate production
function is that it fails to incorporate costs
of adjustment. Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1967) presented
a production model with internal costs of
adjustment. Fumio Hayashi (2000) shows how
to identify these adjustment costs from James
Tobin's (1969) Q-ratio, the ratio of the stock
market value of the producing unit to the market
value of the unit's assets. Implementation of
this approach requires simultaneous modeling
of production and asset valuation. If costs of
adjustment are external, as in the production
possibility frontier (1), asset valuation can be
modeled separately from production.32
C. Sources of Growth
Under the assumption that product and factor
markets are competitive, producer equilibrium
implies that the share-weighted growth
of outputs is the sum of the share-weighted
growth of inputs and growth in total factor
productivity:
(2) wi,,,,A In I,, + wi',cA In IC + WiP,sA In Is
+ wP,t/A In It + wc,A In C,,
+Wc,cAIn Cc
- VK,nA In K,, + VK,CA In KC
+ VK,sA In Ks + VK,tA In Kt
+ VLA In L + A In A
where wP and -v denote average value shares. The
shares of outputs and inputs add to one under
the additional assumption of constant returns,
WI,n + WI,c + WI's + WI,t + WC,1n + WC,c
VK,n + VK,c + VK,s + VK,t + VL 1.
Equation (2) makes it possible to identify the
contributions of outputs as well as inputs to U.S.
economic growth. The growth rate of output is
a weighted average of growth rates of investment
and consumption goods outputs. The contribution
of each output is its weighted growth
rate. Similarly, the growth rate of input is a
weighted average of growth rates of capital and
labor services and the contribution of each input
is its weighted growth rate. The contribution of
TFP, the growth rate of the augmentation factor
A in equation (2), is the difference between
growth rates of output and input.
Table 6 presents results of a growth accounting
decomposition, based on equation (2), for
the period 1948-1999 and various subperiods,
following Jorgenson and Stiroh (1999, 2000b).
Economic growth is broken down by output and
input categories, quantifying the contribution of
information technology to investment and consumption
outputs, as well as capital inputs.
These estimates identify computers, software,
and communications equipment as distinct
types of information technology.
Rearranging equation (2), the results can be
presented in terms of average labor productivity
(ALP), defined as y = YIH, the ratio of
output Y to hours worked H, and k = KIH is
the ratio of capital services K to hours worked:
(3) A Iny== VKA Ink
+ VL(A InL - A In H) + A In A.
3' Karl Whelan (1999) also employs Solow's concept of
embodiment.
32 See, for example, John Y. Campbell and Robert J.
Shiller (1998).