may result in large changes in actual
choices made. This proposition applies
just as much to ethical choices and
common values as it does to private
tastes. It throws a good deal of light also
on what might be called the evolutionary
ecology of ethical systems. Successful ethical
systems tend to create subcultures,
and these subcultures tend to perpetuate
and propagate the ethical systems which
created them. This principle helps to explain
the persistent division of mankind
into sects, nations, and ideological groups.
If we were to map the ethical preference
systems of the individuals who comprise
mankind, we would not find a uniform
distribution but we would find a very
sharp clustering into cultures and subcultures
with relatively empty spaces between
the clusters. All the members of a
single sect, for instance, tend to think
rather alike in matters of ethical judgment
and differentiate themselves sharply
from the ethical judgments of other sects.
Individuals tend to be attracted to one or
another of these clusters, leaving the social
space between them relatively empty,
like space between the stars. The reasons
for this phenomenon lie deep in the dynamics
of the human learning process, for
our preferences are learned mainly from
those with whom we have the most communication.
This principle accounts for
the perpetuation of such clusters, though
it does not necessarily account for their
original formation, which exhibits many
puzzling phenomena. The splitting of
these clusters in a kind of mitosis is also
an important and very puzzling phenomenon.
Once we realize, however, that these
are highly sensitive systems as economic
analysis suggests, we can see how wide
divergences might arise. Thus, the actual
difference in preferences and even opportunities
between, shall we say, the socialist
countries and the capitalist countries,
may in fact be quite small, but this difference
is enough to produce a very wide
difference in the choices made.
Economics has made its own attempt to
solve some of the problems involved in the
moral judglnent in what we know as welfare
economics. I believe this attempt has
been a failure, though a reasonably glorious
one, and we should take a brief look
at it. Welfare economics attempts to ask
the question "What do we mean when we
say that one state of a social system is
better than another in strictly economic
terms?" The most celebrated answer
given is the Paretian optimum, which
states in effect that Condition A of a social
system is economically superior to
Condition B, if nobody feels worse off in
A than in B, and if at least one person
feels better off. "Better off" or "worse off"
are measured of course by preferences, so
that we could restate the condition as saying
that State A is superior to State B if
one or more persons prefer A and if nobody
prefers B. If we permit internal redistributions
within the system, that is,
compensation, the range of possible superior
states is considerably broadened.
From this simple principle a wide range of
applications has been found possible in a
stirring intellectual drama which might
well be subtitled "Snow White (the fairest
of all) and the Seven Marginal Conditions.
"
Many, if not most, economists accept
the Paretian optimum as almost self-evident.
Nevertheless, it rests on an extremely
shaky foundation of ethical propositions.
The more one examines it, for instance,
the more clear it becomes that
economists must be extraordinarily nice
people even to have thought of such a
thing, for it implies that there is no malevolence
anywhere in the system. It implies,
likewise, that there is no benevolence,
the niceness of economists not quite
extending as far as good will. It assumes
selfishness, that is, the independence of individual