phenomena under examination may be quan-
tified, and thus provide rationalizations (ad-
mittedly for those who want them) for policies
that cannot by any realistic test pass muster.
Perhaps the lesson is that there is a signifi-
cant danger that economic theory will be mis-
interpreted in the policy arena, and researchers
could productively take more pains to distance
themselves from policy conclusions that are
not warranted by their analysis. Theoretical
papers which end with "it has been shown
that, under conditions x and y, policy z may
no longer represent an optimum ... Therefore
policy should ..." are obviously overstepping
their bounds when the empirical relevance of
x and y are not yet established, and even more
so when conditions other than x and y also may
be important (as, for example, with rent-
seeking).
But many good theory papers are written
where the authors assume that their audience
will consist entirely of other theorists. In such
instances, good theory may be misused, and it
certainly will be in the self-interest of some to
harness it to their own ends. It behooves ap-
plied economists, as well as the theorists, to
be careful to interpret the policy relevance of
results in ways which minimize the scope for
misinterpretation. This is as true for those
seeking to find "dynamic" aspects of export-
ing, or endogenous aspects of a "big push,"
as it should have been for those developing the
infant industry or optimum tariff arguments.
Complex results, such as those noted by
Johnson (1970), are particularly suspect in
that they can be interpreted in whatever ways
suit the decision maker or lobbyist.
Finally, there is theory which provides no
guidance as to when or how to observe the
phenomenon. In such instances, it is difficult
to find policy implications that will not be cap-
tured. One possible challenge for theorists
might well be to ask for at least one plausible
incentive-compatible mechanism under which
the inefficiencies they identify might be im-
proved upon by policy makers and bureau-
crats. The existence of infant industries, of
cases in which there are rents that might be
captured by appropriate strategic trade policy,
and of informational asymmetries and other
market imperfections cannot be doubted. But
until the magnitude of these phenomena can
somehow be measured, or incentive-compatible
mechanisms for correcting them can be de-
vised, theorists asserting their presence are
simply providing a carte blanche for policy
makers and bureaucrats to intervene in what-
ever ways they like, and this will simulta-
neously be seized upon by special interests to
bolster their causes.
No matter how careful economists are,
special interests always will seize their re-
search results in supporting their own objec-
tives. And, no matter how sophisticated and
careful research findings are, there always
will be politicians formulating, and non-
economists administering, policies. Recog-
nition of these propositions could do much
to increase the degree to which economists'
research results can contribute (positively)
to policy formulation.
I