trying to reduce the federal deficit along
the fixed path specified by the Gramm-Rudman-
Hollings amendment, for example, has
given us a taste of some of the possible
disadvantages of a balanced budget rule.
There is danger that specific dollar targets
for the deficit will require procyclical fiscal
policy, perhaps precipitating a recession that
would then make budget balance even less
attainable. Moreover, the effort to reach the
targets can induce cosmetic or self-defeating
measures, such as moving spending from one
fiscal year to another for no valid reason,
selling assets to reduce a current deficit while
exacerbating future ones, and accomplishing
desired purposes by regulatory or other nonbudgetary
means.
The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings experience,
however, has suggested the usefulness of a
different approach to deficit reduction than a
balanced budget rule; namely, a deficit neutral
amendment rule. If legislators advocating
a tax preference are required to propose
a rate increase to pay for it, special interest
tax legislation may falter. Similarly, the requirement
that a proposal for additional
spending be accompanied by a simultaneous
proposal to raise taxes or reduce another
spending program may be an effective brake
on deficits.
The other direction of reform reflects the
contrasting view that the separation of
powers and the diffusion of responsibility in
our government make it too difficult for the
electorate to enforce its will by holding officials
responsible for their policies. The
potential for deadlock would be reduced if
the United States moved toward a parliamentary
system, or found a way to hold
political parties more strictly accountable for
proposing or carrying out identifiable policies.

Casual examination of parliamentary democracies,
such as the Untied Kingdom and
Sweden, does not provide striking evidence
of the superiority of parliamentary systems
for making economic choices, even if one did
not have two hundred years of tradition to
contend with in changing our system. The
more modest notion that our system would
work more smoothly if political parties had
better defined positions and disciplined their
elected members more strictly may well be
right, but seems to fly in the face of current
history. Voters are showing less strong party
affiliation and more inclination to choose for
themselves among candidates, while members
of Congress tend increasingly to be
pragmatists willing to work out nonideological
compromises across party lines. These
trends seem likely to be the irreversible consequences
of greater education, sophistication,
and exposure to public issues among
voters and elected officials alike and to make
a resurgence of party discipline and loyalty
unrealistic.
IV. Making the Economic Policy System
Work Better
My own proposals involve less drastic
changes in the structure of our government.
They reflect a strong faith in the ability of
informed citizens and their elected representatives
to make policy decisions for the
common good, even to make substantial
sacrifices and take political risks to further
what they perceive as the long-run national
interest-once they understand what the
choices are. I also believe that the separation
of powers between the executive and legislative
branches works pretty well most of the
time. It provides needed protection against
overzealousness in either branch, albeit at
some risk of occasional stalemate.
The main problem, it seems to me, is that
our economic policy system has gradually
become so complex, diffused, and fragmented
that it impedes rather than fosters
informed choices on major issues. The fragmentation
imposes two kinds of costs. First,
it makes the decision process itself exceedingly
inefficient. Decisions are made too
often, in too great detail, and reviewed by
too many layers of decision makers in the
executive branch and in Congress. Too much
time is absorbed in procedure and in wrangling
over details, not enough on major decisions.
It's time to simplify the process, to
weed out some of the institutions, and to tip
the balance between substance and process
back toward substance.
Second, decisions are made separately that
ought to be made together, or at least with