Of course, the disturbances of macroeco-
nomic equilibrium that were visualized by
Wicksell and Schumpeter, and by Fredrich
von Hayek, R. G. Hawtrey, D. H. Robert-
son, the early Keynes (and so many others)
were, in the end, mainly disturbances of the
price level, although they normally left a
permanent legacy of a larger capital stock,
newer technology, and increased human
capital.'6 However, most of these pioneers
recognized that the price level did not auto-
matically, instantaneously, and proportion-
ately reflect every change in the stock of
money or the output of goods; for instance,
many recognized that prices did not fall suf-
ficiently promptly in recessions to avoid non-
frictional unemployment of labor and/or
machines. And such unemployed resources
then permitted a subsequent expansion of
real output, once the next boom began.
VII. Price-Theoretic Models of
Aggregate Investment
Most business cycle theories-or, more
broadly, most macroeconomic theories of the
"medium run"-from the time of Wicksell
or even earlier, have thus been built on
more-or-less elaborate price-theoretical con-
siderations, related essentially to investment;
and mainly to fixed investment. For, clearly,
it is investment-not consumption or pro-
prietors' labor-that is the primary source of
medium-run macroeconomic disturbance and
instability. Although (as noted earlier) sharp
fluctuations in the rate of investment in in-
ventories contribute more to U.S. business
cycle recessions and to the early stages of
business recoveries than do fluctuations in
plant-and-equipment investment, the latter
typically contribute significantly more to ex-
pansions of GNP from cyclical troughs to
peaks than does inventory accumulation.
Moreover, in the medium and longer run,
fluctuations in inventories are governed by
most of the same factors that govern plant
and equipment expenditures.
There are many price levels-relative price
levels-important for investment in plant,
equipment, and normal inventories. They in-
clude:
1) The price level for loans: some partic-
ular rate of interest, or some average of rates,
at which investment can be financed;
2) The demand-price level of new capital
goods, reflecting their physical productivity,
the prices of the goods produced by their
use, and the supply-prices of cooperating
factors of production;
3) The supply-price level for new capital
goods, sometimes taken as a function of their
rate of production;
4) The supply-price and the demand-price
levels of entrepreneurship and innovation;
5) The supply-price levels of risk and/or
uncertainty bearing, by investors and lenders;
6) The level and nature of the prices
imposed by government; taxes and their struc-
ture; and
7) The price level of ownership of exist-
ing enterprises; that is, the level of share
prices.
The question is not which among these
price levels are relevant for investment: all of
them (and others) are doubtless relevant to
some degree. Rather, the question is: which
are "strategically" important? Which are the
price levels, the changes in one or more of
which relative to another or others are pri-
marily responsible-in the real world-for
macroeconomic stability or instability, real
and nominal?
I can illustrate the wide variety of price
theoretic explanations of investment by ref-
erence to three familiar but quite different
examples. 7