inflation will be thrown away if the bonds
are escalated. These considerations are
only remotely related to the mechanisms of
wage and price inflation we have been
discussing. In the 1970's we know that the
government can, if it wishes, control
aggregate demand-at any rate, its ability
to do so is only trivially affected by the
presence or absence of Pigou effects on
part of the government debt.
In considering the intertemporal tradeoff,
we have no license to assume that the
natural rate of unemployment is independent
of the history of actual unemployment.
Students of human capital have
been arguing convincingly that earning
capacity, indeed transferable earning capacity,
depends on experience as well as
formal education. Labor markets soggy
enough to maintain price stability may
increase the number of would-be workers
who lack the experience to fit them for
jobs that become vacant.

Macro-economic policies, monetary and
fiscal, are incapable of realizing society's
unemployment and inflation goals simultaneously.
This dismal fact has long stimulated
a search for third instruments to do
the job: guideposts and incomes policies,
on the one hand, labor market and manpower
policies, on the other. Ten to fifteen
years ago great hopes were held for both.
The Commission on Money and Credit in
1961, pp. 39-40, hailed manpower policies
as the new instrument that would overcome
the unemployment-inflation dilemma.
Such advice was taken seriously in
Washington, and an unprecedented spurt
in manpower programs took place in the
1960's. The Council of Economic Advisers
set forth wage and price guideposts in
1961-62 in the hope of "talking down" the
Phillips curve (pp. 185-90). It is discouraging
to find that these efforts did not keep
the problem of inflationary bias from
becoming worse than ever.
So it is not with great confidence or
optimism that one suggests measures to
mitigate the tradeoff. But some proposals
follow naturally from the analysis, and
some are desirable in themselves anyway.
First, guideposts do not wholly deserve
the scorn that "toothless jawboning" often
attracts. There is an arbitrary, imitative
component in wage settlements, and maybe
it can be influenced by national standards.
Second, it is important to create jobs for
those unemployed and discouraged workers
who have extremely low probability of
meeting normal job specifications. Their
unemployment does little to discipline
wage increases, but reinforces their deprivation
of human capital and their other
disadvantages in job markets. The National
Commission on Technology, Automation
and Economic Progress pointed
out in 1966 the need for public service jobs
tailored to disadvantaged workers. They
should not be "last resort" or make-work
jobs, but regular permanent jobs capable
of conveying useful experience and inducing
reliable work habits. Assuming
that the additional services produced by
the employing institutions are of social
utility, it may well be preferable to employ
disadvantaged workers directly rather
than to pump up aggregate demand until
they reach the head of the queue.
Third, a number of measures could be
taken to make markets more responsive to
excess supplies. This is the kernel of truth
in the market-power explanation of inflationary
bias. In many cases, government
regulations themselves support prices and
wages against competition. Agricultural
prices and construction wages are wellknown
examples. Some trade unions follow
wage policies that take little or no account
of the interests of less senior members and
of potential members. Since unions operate
with federal sanction and protection, perhaps
some means can be found to insure
that their memberships are open and that
their policies are responsive to the unemployed
as well as the employed.

As for macro-economic policy, I have