I. The Allocation Task of Yesteryear
Nearly two score years ago, on the occasion
of Columbia's bicentennial celebration,
Sir Dennis Robertson gave an address entitled
"What Do Economists Economize," the
burden of which was that, since presumably
economists are the most expert economizers,
they should economize the most precious
thing in the world, namely, love, or
altruism. This would be done in part by so
arranging things that in the ordinary conduct
of life individual choices made on the
basis of self-interest in terms of market
prices would at least be consistent with maximizing
social welfare, so that the exercise
of scarce resources of altruism could be
concentrated on situations where Adam
Smith's unseen hand could not be made to
serve. To me, one implication of this was
that economists should see to it that market
prices correctly reflect the relevant marginal
social cost of various alternatives. I have
devoted a major part of my career to the
promotion of such marginal-cost pricing, but
thus far with a notable lack of practical
success outside academia.
At the time of Robertson's address, indeed,
there was a certain euphoria prevailing
among at least part of the economics
profession over the prospect of curbing the
business cycle and maintaining a high level
of economic activity through Keynesian fiscal
policy. Under these circumstances it was
reasonable to think that the chief remaining
job of the economist was to assure a
Pareto-efficient allocation of a given aggregate
of resources. The event, however,
proved otherwise. The conventional wisdom
of regarding budget deficits as improvident
prodigality, and government debt as the
legacy of a craven deferral of burden to the
future, resumed command.

One eminent economist is said to have
remarked, in effect, that it was the function
of the science of public finance to see to it
that nothing of importance is ever done or
left undone merely for financial reasons.
Alas, the financial reasons have thus far
carried the day, and we have not had anything
approaching real full employment
since the Korean War, or indeed in peacetime
at any time since 1925, if then, at least
in terms of the Beveridge definition of full
employment as a situation wherein there
are at least as many unfilled job openings as
there are unemployed individuals seeking
work.

In the Eisenhower years, the conventional
wisdom held sway in spite of the
absence of serious contraindications to the
Keynesian prescription. In the 1960's, the
simple Keynesian analysis began to be called
into question by the emergence of stagflation,
a phenomenon not contemplated by
the earlier Keynesian models. A new relationship,
the Phillips curve, relating the
evolution of inflation to the level of unemployment
was added to the economists'
armamentarium, with its "non-inflationaccelerating
rate of unemployment" or

NIARU.

This NIARU is of course not a fixed
datum, but varies over time and place according
to the sociopolitical ambience, the
mechanics of the labor market, and the
vigor of competition. It may have been rising
over time as a result of the increased
sophistication and differentiation of products,
real and factitious, giving sellers, as
the ones most knowledgeable about the
characteristics of their products and their
markets, considerable leeway to raise their
prices without unacceptable loss of sales.
This process is ultimately held in check only