revised figures now available: from 5.7 percent
in the second to 4.3 and 4.1-hardly much
larger than the error of estimate for quarterly
rates! To be sure, in the first quarter of 1975 the
growth fell to .6 percent. But, by then, the violent
contraction was well on its way-between
September 1974 and February 1975, industrial
production fell at an annual rate of 25 percent.
Furthermore, by the next quarter, monetary
growth had resumed heftily. There is thus no
way the monetarist proposition can square with
these facts unless their long and variable lags
are so variable that they sometimes turn into
substantial leads. But even then, by anybody's
model, a one-quarter dip in the growth of money
could not have had a perceptible effect.
B. What Macro Stabilization Policies
Can Accomplish, and How

But recognizing that the adherence to a stable
money growth path through much of 1974 bears
a major responsibility for the sharp contraction
does not per se establish that the policy was
mistaken. The reason is that the shock that hit
the system in 1973-74 was not the usual type of
demand shock which we have gradually learned
to cope with, more or less adequately. It was,
instead, a supply or price shock, coming from
a cumulation of causes, largely external. This
poses an altogether different stabilization problem.
In particular, in the case of demand shocks,
there exists in principle an ideal policy which
avoids all social costs, namely to offset completely
the shock thus, at the same time, stabilizing
employment and the price level. There
may be disagreement as to whether this target
can be achieved and how, but not about the
target itself.

But in the case of supply shocks, there is no
miracle cure-there is no macro policy which
can both maintain a stable price level and keep
employment at its natural rate. To maintain
stable prices in the face of the exogenous price
shock, say a rise in import prices, would require
a fall in all domestic output prices; but we know
of no macro policy by which domestic prices can
be made to fall except by creating enough slack,
thus putting downward pressure on wages. And
the amount of slack would have to be substantial
in view of the sluggishness of wages in the face
of unemployment. If we do not offset the exogenous
shock completely, then the initial burst,
even if activated by an entirely transient rise in
some prices, such as a once and for all deterioration
in the terms of trade, will give rise to further
increases, as nominal wages rise in a vain attempt
at preserving real wages; this secondary
reaction too can only be cut short by creating
slack. In short, once a price shock hits, there is
no way of returning to the initial equilibrium
except after a painful period of both above equilibrium
unemployment and inflation.
There are, of course, in principle, policies
other than aggregate demand management to
which we might turn, and which are enticing
in view of the unpleasant alternatives offered by
demand management. But so far such policies,
at least those of the wage-price control variety,
have proved disappointing. The design of better
alternatives is probably the greatest challenge
presently confronting those interested in stabilization.
However, these policies fall outside my
present concern. Within the realm of aggregate
demand management, the only choice open to
society is the cruel one between alternative feasible
paths of inflation and associated paths of
unemployment, and the best the macroeconomist
can offer is policies designed to approximate
the chosen path.

In light of the above, we may ask: is it conceivable
that a constant rate of growth of the
money supply will provide a satisfactory response
to price shocks in the sense of giving
rise to an unemployment-inflation path to which
the country would object least?
C. The Monetarist Prescription: Or, Constant
Money Growth Once More

The monetarists are inclined to answer this
question affirmatively, if not in terms of the
country's preferences, at least in terms of the
preferences they think it should have. This is
evidenced by their staunch support of a continuation
of the 6 percent or so rate of growth through