of wages and average income. His first
monograph, subtitled "With Remarks on the
Speculations of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet,
and Other Writers," begins with an objection
to the conclusion of these writers that the
economic position of mankind will continue
to improve over time. In the process of rebutting
their arguments, Malthus develops
his famous theory of population growth and
reaches much more pessimistic conclusions
about the long-term economic prospects of
the average family.

You will recall that the Malthusian model
assumes diminishing returns to increases in
the level of population-that is, to increases
in employment-when land and other capital
are fixed. The analytical heart of his model
(I am not concerned with the details of what
he actually said) is consistent with constant
returns to the scale of labor and capital, as
long as the capital stock, including usable
land, does not respond to changes in wages
and interest rates.

The response of fertility and mortality to
changes in income determine the Malthusian
supply of population. Population grows more
slowly when wages are low because the average
person marries later and thereby has
fewer children (the preventive check on
population), and also because deaths increase
when families are poorer (the positive
check). Historical studies indicate that the
effect of the economy on age at marriage was
considerably greater, at least in Europe, than
was its effect on death rates (see Ronald D.
Lee, 1987b, pp. 450-51). Therefore, I will
ignore the positive effect and consider only
the preventive check through changes in the
number of children.

The long-run equilibrium wage rate is
found at the point on the positively inclined
population supply curve where the average
family has two children. The economy's production
function then determines the stationary
level of population that is consistent
with this long-run wage rate. There is no
presumption that this equilibrium wage is at
the subsistence level, especially if the positive
check through death rates is not important.
In this model tastes for marriage
and children, not vague notions of subsistence,
determine long-run wages.
The long-run wage is stable in the Malthusian
model when shocks push the system
out of equilibrium. For example, if an infectious
disease destroys much of the population,
as the Black Death destroyed perhaps
25 percent of certain European populations
during the fourteenth century, the decline in
population raises the marginal productivity
of labor. The resulting rise in wages encourages
families to marry earlier and have more
children. Population begins to grow and its
increase over time lowers wage rates back
toward equilibrium. Ultimately, this dynamic
process restores both the wage rate
and the level of population to their long-run
levels.

If the amount of usable land increases,
wages rise and that stimulates higher birth
rates. Again, the growth in population continues
to lower wage rates until eventually
the long-run wage is restored. However,
population is permanently higher because
the amount of land is greater.
This example brings out that the equilibrium
wage is more immune to shocks in
the Malthusian system than is the level of
population. Indeed, if tastes are stable over
time-the Malthusian model, along with
George Stigler and myself (1977), assumes
de gustibus non est disputandum -and if
technology does not continue to improve,
the equilibrium wage rate remains fixed by
the point on the stable supply curve where
the typical couple has two surviving children.
The Malthusian model does help some in
explaining very long-term changes in
European wage rates prior to the nineteenth
century (Lee, 1987b, gives a good analysis of
the evidence). People evidently married
earlier when wages were above the equilibrium
level and married later when they
were below.

It is ironic that Malthus's first essay on
population was published in 1798 at the
close of the eighteenth century. Although his
system was accepted by many leading
economists of the nineteenth century (see
John Stuart Mill, 1848, Book I, ch. X), events
after publication were not kind to the theory.
Fertility eventually fell sharply rather
than rose as wage rates and per capita incomes
continued to advance during much of