Let us start with the issue of indexing
wages in individual firms to the general price
level. In the United States, wages are not
widely protected against changes in price by
explicit indexing formulae. In 1983, only 58
percent of union workers were covered by
COLAs. On the average, the ones that were,
received protection against only 53 percent
of the changes in the CPI. Jo Anna Gray
(1978) and Stanley Fischer (1977) examined
the conditions under which indexing would
or would not be optimal for individual firms
given the assumption that wages once set are
not renegotiated for some period. The main
conclusion from this research is that, in the
face of real (as opposed to nominal) shocks,
indexing, by freezing real wages, produces
real wage results that are not optimal for the
firm. Given the probability that nominal and
real shocks are both likely to occur, Gray
shows that partial indexing will be an optimal
choice. Moreover, even nominal shocks
are likely, during the transition to a new
equilibrium, to have nonneutral effects; the
firm's product price and the Consumer Price
Index may not move in parallel. As a consequence,
indexing would have unwanted real
effects even in the face of monetary shocks.
While we have seen that some degree of real
wage stickiness is optimal, the absence of full
indexing even in multiyear union contracts
indicates that the opposite extreme- automatic
guarantees of a fixed real wage over
several years-is not a workable approach.
Within-year indexing is virtually nonexistent
in annual union contracts and in the
annual wage adjustment cycle followed by
the vast bulk of nonunion firms. Under implicit
contracts, changes in the path of average
wages and prices in the economy as a
whole or in relevant submarkets are commonly
agreed to constitute a major element
in determining the size of those annual wage
adjustments. But, in the United States, it is
almost universally the practice not to make
the relationship to the price level or to average
wages an explicit and automatic one,
either within the year or over longer periods.
And, as noted earlier, in those multiyear
union contracts where indexing is found, that
indexing is almost always less than complete.
Haggling costs are apparently minimized by
making periodic wage adjustments that simultaneously
take into account nominal, real,
and relative factors, rather than by fixing the
nominal relationship in a formula and separately
adjusting for changes in real and
relative conditions.
In any event, even if wages were fully
indexed to prices, they would not produce
highly flexible nominal wages in response to
aggregate demand shocks. The cumulative
costs of wage indexing, in the face of real
shocks and the transitional nonneutrality of
nominal shocks, would be severely exacerbated
if the indexing were instantaneous.
As a consequence, the indexing we do observe-
except in countries which have developed
extremely rapid and sustained inflation
-typically involves a substantial lag between
observed price changes and wage adjustments.
Such indexing only guarantees a
gradual response of wages to aggregate demand
shocks in proportion as prices themselves
are flexible in the face of constant
wages. Even if prices were competitively determined,
the economy would still have to
work its way through a series of price-wageprice
reactions in each one of which prices
fell, relative to wages, by an amount depending
on the slope of the marginal cost curves.
And prices do not move with such frequency
or flexibility. Arthur Okun (1981) has carefully
elaborated the reasons why, in the
customer markets which predominate in
modern economies, prices are not likely to
move quickly and easily up and down a
marginal cost curve. Robert Gordon (1981)
has elaborated how the highly articulated
input-output relationships of modern economies
tend to slow the price reaction to aggregate
demand shocks. And George Akerlof
and Janet Yellen (1984) have recently shown
that in less than perfectly competitive markets
inertial price-setting behavior in response to
a shock may impose only second-order losses
on the firms who follow such behavior, even
though the macro result may be first-order
losses for the economy.8 Everything else
8Technically the Akerlof-Yellen proposition applies
to situations in which agents' objective functions are
differentiable in their own prices and wages-a condition
that is not met in the competitive model, but is met
in a wide range of other market models.