being equal, indexing wages to prices would
provide some nominal wage flexibility in the
face of nominal shocks. But if wages are
otherwise sticky, indexing them to prices
would still yield a very gradual iterative pro-
cess of demand inflation or disinflation.
Granted the obstacles to indexing wages to
prices in implicit contracts, and the in-
sufficiency of that arrangement-even if
feasible-to produce prompt nominal wage
adjustments, why are not implicit contracts
indexed to some aggregate like nominal GNP
or the money supply? Such an arrangement
might seem to be a way to approximate the
role of the Walrasian auctioneer, automati-
cally generating W at a level to clear the
aggregate supply-demand balance, while rel-
ative wages continued to be set under im-
plicit contracts along lines suggested earlier.
In fact, of course, we observe no such
arrangement anywhere in the world, and a
little thought supplies a number of reasons.
For purposes of indexing wage contracts to
nominal GNP, some agreed-upon process
would have to be found for separating "dis-
turbances" in nominal GNP from the trend
increases consistent with full employment at
a stable inflation rate. Anything that altered
the parallel growth of average and marginal
labor productivity, or the growth of full em-
ployment labor inputs, would change the
trend and require the contracts to be renego-
tiated. Robert Gordon (1981, 1983) has
identified a number of reasons, why, even if
the appropriate split could be made between
trend and disturbances, indexing wages to
nominal GNP would not be feasible in im-
plicit contracts. If prices themselves are not
completely flexible relative to wages, declines
in nominal GNP under an indexed system
would produce long periods with unwar-
ranted real wage decreases. And, since the
costs and hence the prices of the typical large
firm depend on the costs and prices of a long
and heterogeneous chain of suppliers, index-
ing wages on nominal GNP would only in-
dex part of an individual firm's costs.
Workers would rightly be skeptical that such
an indexing system would quickly move
prices down proportionally with wages.
The problems of automatic indexing to
some other nominal aggregate, like the mon-
ey supply, are even worse since the relation-
ship between any other aggregate variable
and the equilibrium full employment wage
level is still more complex and unstable than
it is in the case of nominal GNP. And unless
all firms could somehow agree on a common
translation formula for indexing purposes,
nominal demand shocks would produce a
wide dispersion of unwarranted changes in
relative wages. (This point is elaborated fur-
ther in the paragraphs that follow.) More
complex explicit indexing formulas can be
imagined, but are no more feasible than sim-
ple ones. The two parties to a contract would
be subjecting themselves to very great uncer-
tainty in agreeing to a given information set
and forecasting model as the basis for the
indexing. It takes a very large run of data
to sort systematic error from noise in eco-
nomic time-series. And so agents would have
huge space for disagreement about the ap-
propriate information set and the relevant
model for translating information into fore-
casts. Alternative choices could lead to biased
outcomes, whose bias could not be de-
termined for a very long time. (The ap-
propriate order in which to enter variables in
a vector autoregression model is hardly the
subject for fruitful labor negotiations.) In
short, feasible state-contingent contracts can-
not be designed to replace the Walrasian
auctioneer as a means of coordinating the
system's response to nominal shocks.9
In the absence of explicit state-contingent
contracts, can nominal wage flexibility be
rescued by a rational expectations model of
wage determination? Why do not individual
firms and their workers rationally forecast
the change in the equilibrium path of aver-
age wages (W) expected to result from a
nominal shock, and promptly change wages
accordingly, recognizing that their actions
involve no decision to change relative wages?