animal life will be lost before we learn their
genetic secrets. And the earth itself deserves
our respect. For many people, something
close to religious values are at stake.
This issue is doubly difficult to assess. It is
difficult to know how to value what is at
risk, and it is difficult to know just what is at
risk. Even if climate changes at each point
in time could be predicted accurately, the
impacts on natural ecosystems could not yet
be determined. And the benefits of slowing
climate change by some particular amount
would be even more uncertain. We know
that carbon fuels are not going to be discontinued;
the issue is the marginal gains, from
carbon abatement and a slowing of climate
change, in the survival of species and
ecosystems and the preservation of enjoyable
environments. This is an issue that
simply has not been addressed.
The third argument for spending heavily
to slow climate change is that the conclusions
I reported earlier may be quite wrong.
I said that the climate models predict that
climates will change slowly and not much;
the models do not produce discontinuities,
surprises, catastrophes. What is known about
weather and climate constitutes an equilibrium
system.
The possibility has to be considered that
if global temperature increases, not by the
median estimate of three degrees Celsius
for a doubling of carbon in the atmosphere,
but by four or five degrees and continues to
rise beyond the doubling because carbon
fuels are still in use worldwide, some atmospheric
or oceanic circulatory systems may
switch to alternative equilibria, producing
regional changes that are both sudden and
extreme.
Have any such possibilities been thought
of? One that was thought of but diminished
upon further investigation was the possibility
that the west Antarctic ice sheet might
glaciate into the ocean and raise the sea
level by 20 feet. As recently as 15 years ago,
the best scientific judgment was that this
could happen within 75 years as a result of
global warming. This prospect naturally attracted
attention, and further investigation
with the help of newly available satellite
sensing of glacial movement led to reassuring
estimates that if that catastrophic rise in
sea level were to happen it would take at
least a few hundred years and be gradual,
not sudden. But there isn't any scientific
principle according to which all alarming
possibilities prove to be benign upon further
investigation.
A currently discussed likely source of discontinuous
change is in the way oceans behave.
Amsterdam is north of Newfoundland,
yet is warmer, courtesy of the Gulf
Stream. There is some indication that in
earlier interglacial periods ocean currents
may have pursued different courses. If a
current like the Gulf Stream, or the
Japanese Current for the United States,
switched into an alternative pattern, the climatic
consequences might be both sudden
and severe. (Paradoxically, global warming
might freeze Western Europe.)
Insurance against catastrophes is thus an
argument for doing something expensive
about greenhouse emissions. But to pay a
couple percent of GNP as insurance premium,
one would hope to know more about
the risk to be averted. I believe research to
improve climate predictions should be concentrated
on the extreme possibilities, not
on modest improvements to median projections.

I said that current estimates suggest that
it might cost a couple percent of GNP to
postpone the doubling of carbon in the atmosphere
by several decades. Is 2 percent a
big number or a small one?
That depends on your perspective and on
what the comparison is. In recent years 100
billion dollars per year in budgets or taxes
has been a politically unmanageable magnitude
in the United States. On the other
hand, subtracting 2 percent from GNP in
perpetuity lowers the GNP curve by not
much more than the thickness of a line
drawn with a number-two pencil, or to formulate
it as I did earlier, it postpones the
GNP of 2050 until 2051. I say this not to
belittle the loss of 10 trillion dollars from
the American GNP over the next 60 years,
but only to point out that the insurance
premium, if we choose to pay it, will not
send us to the poorhouse. The proper question
is whether, if we were prepared to
spend 2 percent of our GNP in the interest
of protecting against damage due to climate