location, and stabilization, the lagged
effect of tax changes, and automatic versus
discretionary tax changes were not even
part of our vocabulary in the pre-World
War II period. Yet, all of these are now
factored into our economic advice on
taxation.

Even more directly impinging on policy
are the empirical advances. One thinks of
searching studies of particular taxes and
tax components (especially in the Brookings
Studies on Government Finance),
and of the relentless identifying and quantifying
of federal income tax preferences
or "loopholes." Much of the thrust of
economists' recent work on these "tax
expenditures" has been (a) to identify the
beneficiaries and specify the size of the
government subsidies provided in the form
of preferential tax treatment, (b) to define
the inequities, both horizontal and vertical,
that they create, and (c) to estimate
the distortions in resource flows caused by
preferential treatment of oil and gas, housing,
real estate partnerships, and the like,
and measure the resulting welfare loss.
Though the congressional response has
been slow and halting, progress has been
made along the lines plotted by economists,
and a solid base has been laid for
the further tax reform that is surely coming.


Out of the countless other advances,
one stands out, namely, the highly informative
work done on the distributional
impacts of taxation with the aid of the
powerful tool of micro-unit data files (for
example, the MERGE file developed by
Joseph Pechman and Benjamin Okner).
Such micro-unit files are a new-generation
statistical missile, MIRVed so that they
can simultaneously hit multiple revenueestimating
and burden-distribution targets.
With their help, for example, economists
have measured the growing burden
of income, payroll, and consumption taxes
on the lower income groups and developed
techniques for removing them-most recently,
in the context of the impact of
inflation on the same groups.
One should add that if revolution rather
than reform becomes the order of the day
in the federal tax structure, the economist
is ever ready with reasonably sophisticated
analytics and a fair amount of empirical
information on such major alternatives
as a value-added tax, a progressive
expenditure tax, and a net-worth tax. One
of the next stages in tax research, a highly
complex one, will be the general equilibrium
analysis of such sweeping changes
in the tax system as, say, the substitution
of a value-added tax for the corporate
income tax or for part of the payroll tax.
Or, if stimulation of private saving becomes
a compelling objective, perhaps the
substitution of an expenditure tax for
part of the income tax will become a live
issue. The skills of the economist will be
front and center in any such redesign of
the tax system.

The negative income tax story is relevant
here. The concept and its rudimentary
principles were developed and discussed
among economists in the early
1940's. Some of us were already using it as
a teaching device in the mid-1940's. A
quarter-century after its origin, it became
the basis for the Family Assistance Plan
developed by Mr. Nixon's economists.
And a more limited version of the plan
seems again to be rustling in the leaves.
Fiscal Policy

In the domain of fiscal policy, it is harder
to answer the question, "What have
you economists done for us lately?" with
a sparkling array of examples. Much of
the theoretical ferment in this field is associated
with the flowering of Keynesian
macroeconomics in the late 1930's and
1940's, the very period when the microeconomics
of tax incidence and public
expenditures languished.
