as lobbyists sought protection-see Bhagwati
and T. N. Srinivasan, 1980), as resources
were used to obtain valuable import licenses,
thereby incurring deadweight costs. This, in
turn, showed that protection was more costly
than earlier, area-under-the-triangle estimates
had indicated. It further enabled insights as to
the buildup of vested interests that is likely to
arise once any policy is undertaken. When policy
reforms were attempted, it was clear that
those administering earlier policies were in
the forefront of those opposing change, alongside
the beneficiaries of protection (or other
policies).
Related to work on rent-seeking and the tendency
for vested interests to spring up around
the policies that were adopted, others worked
on the theory of overinvoicing and underinvoicing
(see Bhagwati, 1974) and smuggling
(see Munir A. Sheikh, 1974; Mark Pitt, 1981),
again focussing on some of the flaws of the
system of protection as practiced in most developing
countries.
As trade regimes became more chaotic,
empirical work began to document these problems,
bolstered by the development of the
measurement tools embodied in the concepts
of effective rates of protection and domestic
resource costs. Researchers focussing on Pakistan
discovered that there was actually negative
value added in some circumstances,
suggesting that it would have been cheaper to
pay workers to stay home and import the final
product.3"
The Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) sponsored a
series of country studies on industrialization
led by Little et al. The three synthesized
(1970) the results and provided estimates of
effective rates of protection in a number of developing
countries. These showed how high
and indiscriminate protection levels were and
demonstrated the extent to which import substitution
had failed to achieve many of the objectives
set for it. A later series of country
studies undertaken under the auspices of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, synthesized
in works by Bhagwati (1978) and
Krueger (1978), provided further systematic
empirical evidence of the economic wastefulness
and irrationality of the inner-oriented
trade regimes.
F. East Asian Experience
At the same time as evidence of the high
costs of import-substitution regimes was accumulating,
another important development
occurred. Starting first in Taiwan, several East
Asian economies began growing rapidly under
policies diametrically opposite those prevalent
under import substitution. Interestingly, the
Taiwanese government seems to have listened
carefully to the views of S. C. Tsiang,3 1a professor
at Cornell University specializing in international
economics. Following the precepts
of comparative advantage, Tsiang advocated
growth through industrialization, but with industrialization
taking place through increased
capacity for exports, as well as for the domestic
market. Taiwan's transformation from a
high-inflation, inner-oriented, aid-dependent
economy to a major exporting economy is well
known.
Korea, whose initial conditions appeared, if
anything, even less conducive to growth than
those of Taiwan, followed the same pattern. In
the late 1950's, Korea's exports had averaged
only 3 percent of gross domestic product
(GDP) and were growing slowly, if at all,
while imports represented 13 percent of GDP.
The current account deficit was financed
largely by foreign aid, and the domestic savings
rate was virtually zero. Major policy reforms
took place in Korea in the early 1960's,
which greatly increased the return to exporters.
There were fairly uniform incentives to
all exporters and assurances that the real
exchange rate would not appreciate to their
detriment. Reforms also reduced the protection
to import-competing producers and permitted
exporters duty-free importation of needed
intermediate goods and raw materials.
The Korean economic performance was
transformed, as growth rates entered the
double-digit range and living standards
30See Corden (1971 p. 51) for a summary of that
literature.
" For an account of Taiwan's turnaround, see Tsiang
(1985).