THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
individuals and families.33 So my answers here
are speculative and primarily meant to identify
where research might lead us to policy
improvements.
Offhand, the maximum rule does not provide
labor incentives well (incentives are stronger for
workers who have spouses likely to collect auxiliary
benefits since two benefits are increased
by more earnings, and weaker for workers who
are likely to receive a larger spouse benefit since
further earnings by someone receiving a spouse
benefit do not increase that benefit). A similar
(but less extreme) issue arises with income taxation
of a lower-earning spouse.
Offhand, the cost of auxiliary benefits should
be shared between a worker and the program as
a whole. The benefit formula is progressive,
with a higher replacement rate for lower earners,
reflecting differences in retirement needs.
As part of responding to needs, it seems right to
recognize dependents in determining need and
so benefits. But the current rule is not the only
way to do that. Some provision of auxiliary
benefits for children from the general program
makes sense, in keeping with our generalized
support of children in education; some provision
for spouses is relevant in the role of
progressivity-two can not live as cheaply as
one. But the current system has gone too far and
I share in the criticism that too much is given to
the nonworking spouses of high earners.34 Using
system resources to finance large transfers
to those in the upper tier of the earnings distribution
offsets too much of the progressivity in
other portions of the system. Designing a different
system would be politically sensitive and
complex and would need detailed analysis.
The determination of survivor benefits has
also received considerable criticism. Recogniz-
33 If one wants to do a normative analysis solely on the
basis of individual experience, one needs to consider how
resource allocation within the family is affected by the rules
determining benefits and the impact of benefits on marriage
rates. Such an analysis could consider the effects of extend-
ing auxiliary benefits to all long-term relationships, includ-
ing same-sex marriages.
34 Scaling back the spousal benefit for spouses of high
earners (for example by a cap), or a more general overhaul
of auxiliary benefits is likely to meet considerable political
resistance. This suggests not tackling this issue in reform
plans hoping for an early restoration of actuarial balance. In
addition, a general overhaul should be preceded by consid-
erable further analysis.
ing the role of couples in sharing resources at
least partially, it makes sense to relate the benefits
of an elderly survivor to the benefits that
had been received by the couple-a survivor
replacement rate. Currently, survivor replacement
rates vary with the past earnings of husband
and wife, usually, but not always, between
one-half and two-thirds.35 A uniform survivor
replacement rate seems more likely to approximate
relative needs than the current system. The
much higher poverty rate of widows than of
couples, noted above, suggests a higher survivor
replacement rate is needed, with threequarters
having been suggested by some
analysts.36 The change to a uniform and higher
survivor replacement rate could be financed out of
a suitable mix of the total resources of the program
and the benefits of the couple while both are alive.
The current recognition of divorce is to allow
benefits for unremarried divorced spouses and divorced
surviving spouses after at least ten years of
marriage. Since there is a family maximum, some
of these benefits are paid by the system as a whole
and some out of the other auxiliary benefits. The
adaptation of the system for the growth in divorce
seems to me a major issue for research. I do not
know if we can design a system that would be
better, recognizing both labor market incentives
and income distribution issues, or if such a design
could survive political hurdles.37 But it is worth
thinking hard about.
35 It is common to cite the range of one-half to two-thirds
for the survivor's replacement rate, ignoring actuarial ad-
justments. But there are cases above this range once we
include adjustments for the ages at which the benefits are
claimed.
36 Among the TIAA-CREF annuitants who choose a
joint-life annuity from the three available options, roughly
70 percent choose a full benefit to the survivor, nearly 20
percent choose two-thirds, and the rest choose one-half.
Roughly 70 percent of men and 30 percent of women
choose joint-life annuities (Ameriks, 2002).
37 Research hurdles come from combining concerns
about individuals and families. Incentives for retirement
depend on benefits relative to individual earnings, while
need reflects family incomes. Political hurdles come from
the diversity of views about the structure of benefits. Some
like the discouragement of labor force participation by those
with children, others prefer not to subsidize that activity.
Divorced women are among the most vulnerable beneficia-
ries. With the benefits for divorcees with limited earnings
tied to the benefits for spouses, reducing spouse benefits for
high earners affects both well-off and vulnerable groups.
Finding a way to satisfy diverse constituencies will not be
easy, as is shown by repeated groups looking at this issue.
10
MARCH 2004