number of dimensions of improvement.30
So physical capital formation helps the
improvement process, if for no other rea-
son than because it increases the number
of directions in which improvement can
proceed. The interaction is mutual: we
have seen that without any technological
progress whatever, net physical capital
formation could not exceed the equivalent
of the growth of other inputs because less
labor-intensive machines are different ma-
chines. Some readers might therefore pre-
fer the alternative framework outlined at
the outset of Section III (see also fn. 21).
On the whole, I do not believe that we
would become guilty of gross error by dis-
regarding these mutual interactions when
using our framework for distinguishing
between progress-generating activities and
physical investment provided we stay
aware of the fact that large changes in the
scale on which either of these activities is
pursued have implications for the condi-
tions under which it is possible to engage
in the other type of activity. Of this we
must remain aware.
V. Progress-Generating Inputs and Costs:
The Significance of the
"Unrecorded" Items3"
From 1953 to 1966 total recorded R & D
rose from $5.2 billion to $22.2 billion, and
this represents a better than twofold in-
increase when R & D is expressed as a
proportion of the privately produced
GNP. This proportion rose from 1.6 per-
cent to 3.3 percent.32 While an appreciable
part of this increase was "real"-i.e.,
"physical"- considerable importance at-
taches to changes in relative values.
The question of the weight of the real-
input component versus the relative-valua-
tion component of the increase of the ratio
of R & D-cost to private GNP is discussed
quantitatively in Appendix B. This ques-
tion is of some importance because the
relative-valuation component represents
in part rent-formation-a mere transfer of
income-rather than a rise of social costs.
However, in any event, even the relative-
valuation component represents in good
part rising social costs, because the rela-
tively-rising salaries of research workers
(and also of teachers) have attracted into
the progress activities individuals whose
qualifications and productivity would be
higher also in other occupations. This must
have been the driving force of the transfer.
Such a phenomenon is accompanied by
rent-formation, but I suspect that in the
progress-activities-particularly in reseach
and higher education-the rent-formation
accompanying the rise of social costs is
smaller than in the types of activity mostly
referred to when the nature of the transfer-
rent problem is illustrated.33