The plausibility of different profiles of
individual preferences depends on the na-
ture of the problem and on the characteris-
tics of individual motivations. It is readily
checked that with three or more people, if
everyone acts as homo economicus in a
cake-division problem (always preferring
more cake to oneself over all else), then
value restriction and the related conditions
would all be violated, and majority rule
would standardly lead to intransitivities. 'It
is also easy to show that in the commodity
space, with each concentrating on her own
commodity basket, the Arrow conditions
could not be all satisfied by any decision
mechanism over that domain. Majority rule
and other voting procedures of this kind do
cause cycles in general in what is called
"the economic domain" (of interpersonal
commodity space), if everyone votes in a
narrowly self-interested way.
However, majority rule would be a terri-
ble decision procedure in this case, and its
intransitivity is hardly the main problem
here. For example, taking the most deprived
person in a community and passing on half
her share of the cake divided between two
richer persons would be a majority improve-
ment, but scarcely a great welfare-economic
triumph. In view of this, it is perhaps just as
well that the majority rule is not only nasty
and brutish, but also short in consistency.28
The tension between social welfare judg-
ments (of different kinds explored, for ex-
ample, by Meade [1976], Arrow [1977],
Mirrlees (1982), William J. Baumol [1986],
or John Broome [1991]) and mechanical de-
cision rules (like majority decision) with
inward-looking, self-centered individuals is
most obvious here. Also, as Buchanan
(1994a, b) has argued, the acceptability of
majority rule is, in fact, related to its ten-
dency to generate cycles, and the endemic
cyclicity of majority decisions is inescapable,
given the endogeneity of alternative propos-
als that can be presented for consideration.
In practice, in facing political decisions,
the choices may not come in these stark
forms (there are many issues that are mixed
together in political programs and propos-
als), and also individuals do not necessarily
only look at their "own share of the cake"
in taking up political positions and atti-
tudes.29 The "public choice" school has
tended to emphasize the role of logrolling
in political compromises and social deci-
sions. While that school has also been rather
wedded to the presumption of each person
being homo economicus even in these exer-
cises (see Buchanan and Tullock, 1962),
there is a more general social process here
(involving a variety of motivations) that can
be fruitfully considered in examining deci-
sion mechanisms. Central to this is the role
of public discussion in the formation of
preferences and values, which has been em-
phasized by Buchanan (1954a,b).
The condition of independence of irrele-
vant alternatives is also not beyond dispu-
tation and, indeed, has led to debates-ex-
plicitly or by implication-for a very long
time. It was one of the issues that divided
J. C. Borda (1781) and Marquis de Con-
dorcet (1785), the two French mathemati-
cians, who had pioneered the systematic
theory of voting and group decision proce-
dures in the 18th century. One version of
the rule proposed by Borda, based on adding
the rank-order numbers of candidates in
each voter's preference list, violates the in-
dependence condition rather robustly, but it
is not devoid of other merits (and is fre-
quently used in practice).30 Other types of
voting rules have also been shown to have
different desirable properties.3'