without inflation will have to be
dealt with as before, and the latter will require
some degree of supply-side analysis in
other economies as in the U.S. case, but a
whole new range of economic issues looms
on the horizon. These are development of
new, greater energy supplies, protection of
the environment, controlling the exhaustion
of resources, enhancing agricultural supplies,
balancing population development,
and others of like nature. The juggling of
public budgets, the setting of tax rates, and
the giving of a tone to money market conditions
are not going to deal effectively with
this new class of problems, from the viewpoints
of influencing them in a favorable
direction. Similarly, the demand oriented
model is not going to provide much understanding
of them.

The coming problems of the industrial
economy are not going to be wholly dealt
with or analyzed on the basis of the general
purpose Leontief-Keynes system that is
being advocated here. In many cases, the
unforeseen problems that are bound to arise
are going to be more specialized than can
be conveniently anticipated. In such cases,
the analysis must extend into partial system
analysis giving more detailed and explicit
treatment on the supply side. In terms of
model building that means construction of
many "satellite" systems on the supply side,
as the need arises. At the present time,
many energy satellite systems are being developed
to deal with new fuel processes,
large energy using sectors, and large energy
delivery sectors. These satellite systems are
then all linked, in a technical and consistent
way, with the input-output cum macro
model system. In any event, the intent is to
move the discussion of macroeconomics
and policy formation to a new plane of discourse.


The discussion, thus far, has focused on
the modeling and related policy problems
for the modern industrial economy. The
analysis of the supply side, however, is not a
new issue for the developing economy. A
deficiency of demand analyzed within the
framework of the Keynesian Model has not
generally been thought to be the issue or
approach for dealing with the problems of
economic development. That is not to say
that demand relations are nonexistent or
unimportant for the developing economy. It
is primarily a matter of emphasis. Availability
of fixed capital treated as a limiting
factor in production is central to understanding
the problems facing many developing
economies.

Energy problems of production and use
are already apparent, as are population
control and agricultural production. Where
problems of environmental protection and
resource exhaustion have not yet arisen,
they are bound to occur in significant instances;
therefore, it is wise for the development
economist to be forearmed with a full
model for analysis of both supply and demand
sides.

The centrally planned economies are for
the most part industrial economies and
have the same needs for supply-side analysis.
In their cases, the supply side has perhaps
been excessively developed with inadequate
attention paid to the demand side,
not from the viewpoint of deficient demand
but from the viewpoint of chronic excess
demand, with latent inflationary pressure.
The present analysis attempts to look at a
particular facet of the modern economy,
namely the supply side. That does not imply,
by any means, that monetary analysis
and policy are unimportant. Most of the
supply-side problems have monetary implications
or aspects; therefore, monetary
policy must be appropriate to insure the
smooth working of the supply side of the
economy.

In terms of the analytical apparatus
needed to combine monetary analysis with
the kind of supply-demand model that I
have outlined above, it is a matter of integrating
the flow-of-funds system together
with the input-output and final demand national
income system. It would also be in a
full feedback mode. To complement the
supply-side detail underlying the IS curve,
we would turn to the complete flow-offunds
model to provide background for the
LM curve.

It is my feeling that overall monetary and
fiscal policies have been overworked, with
expectations of results that are not j ustified.