Adam Smith, who has strong claim to
being both the Adam and the Smith of
systematic economics, was a professor of
moral philosophy and it was at that forge
that economics was made. Even when I
was a student, economics was still part of
the moral sciences tripos at Cambridge
University. It can claim to be a moral science,
therefore, from its origin, if for no
other reason. Nevertheless, for many
economists the very term "moral science"
will seem like a contradiction. We are
strongly imbued today with the view that
science should be wertfrei and we believe
that science has achieved its triumph precisely
because it has escaped the swaddling
clothes of moral judgment and has
only been able to take off into the vast
universe of the "is" by escaping from the
treacherous launching pad of the "ought."
Even economics, we learn in the history of
thought, only became a science by escaping
from the casuistry and moralizing of
medieval thought. Who, indeed, would
want to exchange the delicate rationality
of the theory of equilibrium price, for the
unoperational vaporings of a "just price"
controversy? In the battle between mechanism
and moralism generally mechanism
has won hands down, and I shall not be
surprised if the very title of my address
does not arouse musty fears of sermonizing
in the minds of many of my listeners.
Let me first explain, then, what I mean
by moral and by moral science. A moral,
or ethical proposition, is a statement
about a rank order of preference among
alternatives, which is intended to apply to
more than one person. A preference which
applies to one person only is a "taste."
Statements of this kind are often called
"value judgments." If someone says, "I
prefer A to B," this is a personal value
judgment, or a taste. If he says, "A is better
than B," there is an implication that
he expects other people to prefer A to B
also, as well as himself. A moral proposition
then is a "common value."
Every culture, or subculture, is defined
by a set of common values, that is, generally
agreed upon preferences. Without a
core of common values a culture cannot
exist, and we classify society into cultures
and subcultures precisely because it is
possible to identify groups who have common
values.

Most tastes are in fact also common
values and have been learned by the process
by which all learning is done, that is,
by mutation and selection. The most absurd
of all pieces of ancient wisdom is
surely the Latin tag de gustibus non disputandum.
In fact, we spend most of our
lives disputing about tastes. If we want to
be finicky about definitions we might turn
the old tag around and say where there is
disputing, we are not talking about tastes.
Nevertheless, even personal tastes are
learned, in the matrix of a culture or a
subculture in which we grow up, by very
much the same kind of process by which
we learn our common values. Purely personal
tastes, indeed, can only survive in a
culture which tolerates them, that is,
which has a common value that private
tastes of certain kinds should be allowed.
One of the most peculiar illusions of