than longitudinal data sets. But whatever their
usefulness for other problems, cross-sectional
data are often highly misleading guides to
trends on such critical economic issues of the
new millennium as the prevalence rates of
chronic disabilities, expenditures on health
care, and pension costs.
Research initiated during the past decade
and a half has called into question previous
views on the length and fixity of the life span,
on the shape of the Gompertz curve (which
relates the log of the age-specific probability
of dying to age), on the theory of the epide-
miological transition, 10 and on the related
proposition that longer life expectancy implies
worse health among the survivors. It appears
that some of the earlier propositions were the
consequence of attempts to infer life-cycle be-
havior from cross-sectional data sets. Such ef-
forts were thwarted by changes in the
sampling design of successive cross sections
and by changes in technology that led to earlier
diagnosis of preexisting conditions (Timothy
Waidmann et al., 1995).
The new research also accumulated evi-
dence on the outward movement of the sur-
vivorship curve. Vaino Kannisto ( 1994) (cf.,
Kannisto, 1996) has shown that, in 14 coun-
tries for which the data are adequate, mortality
over age 80 has been declining by about 1 per-
cent per annum for about half a century with
a significant acceleration in recent decades.
John R. Wilmoth (1995, 1997), who exam-
ined extreme longevity in five countries,
concluded that the right-hand end of the sur-
vivorship curve has been shifting outward for
two centuries. Moreover, there is additional
evidence that the Gompertz curve either levels
off or declines at old old ages (James W.
Vaupel, 1997; cf., S. Jay Olshansky and Bruce
A. Cames, 1997).
Another development is the continued ac-
cumulation of evidence linking events early in
life, and reflected in height, weight, and body
mass index (BMI), to the onset of chronic con-  ditions. " A number of longitudinal studies that
were launched in the 1950's and 1960's have
recently been extended to cover the entire pe-
riod of human growth and early adulthood,
through follow-up studies. These have con-
firined the persistence of central nervous sys-
temr defects induced by malnutrition in early
childhood (Nevin S. Scrimshaw, 1995). Nu-
merous other follow-up studies have shown
that malnutrition and smoking in adolescence
and in middle ages are risk factors for the early
onset of chronic conditions and premature
mortality, especially due to coronary heart dis-
ease, non-insulin-dependent diabetes, and re-
spiratory diseases (Avita Must et al., 1992;
Vincent J. Carey et al., 1997; N. K. Chin et
al., 1997; Joan M. Dom et al., 1997; K. Kotani
et al., 1997; Dan S. Sharp et al., 1997; Ralf
Bender et al., 1998). These relationships have
been established in American, Asian, Austra-
lian, European, and Latin American popula-
tions-rich and poor. Economists have also
discovered a close link between later produc-
tivity and height, BMI, and protein consump-
tion (after controlling for caloric intake)
(John Strauss and Duncan Thomas, 1995;
Thomas and Strauss, 1997).
There has also been an expansion of re-
search into the connection between intrauter-
ine and infant growth and the onset of chronic
diseases (or premature mortality). The strong-
est evidence for such a link that has emerged
thus far is with respect to hypertension, coro-
nary heart disease (CHD), and non-insulin-
dependent diabetes. A review of 32 papers
dealing with the relationship between birth
weight and hypertension by Catherine M. Law
and Alistair W. Shiell (1996) showed a ten-
dency for middle-aged blood pressure to in-
crease as birth weight declined. Evidence of a
connection between birth size and later coro-
nary heart disease has been found in England,
Wales, Sweden, India, and Finland.12