lions, do not much affect the direct wellbeing
of the ruling classes and dictators,
who have little political incentive to prevent
famines unless their rule is threatened by
them. The economic analysis of famines
across the world indicates that only a small
proportion of the population tends to be
stricken-rarely more than 5 percent or so.
Since the shares of income and food of
these poor groups tend normally to be no
more than 3 percent-of the total for the
nation, it is not hard to rebuild their lost
share of income and food, even in very poor
countries, if a serious effort is made in that
direction (see Sen, 1981; Dreze and Sen,
1989). Famines are thus easily preventable,
and the need to face public criticism and to
encounter the electorate provides the government
with the political incentive to take
preventive action with some urgency.
The question that remains is this. Since
only a very small proportion of the population
is struck by a famine (typically 5 percent
or less), how does it become such a
potent force in elections and in public criticism?
This is in some tension with the assumption
of universal self-centeredness, and
presumably we do have the capacity-and
often the inclination-to understand and
respond to the predicament of others.48
There is a particular need in this context to
examine value formation that results from
public discussion of miserable events, in
generating sympathy and commitment on
the part of citizens to do something to prevent
their occurrence.
Even the idea of "basic needs," fruitfully
used in the development literature, has to
be related to the fact that what is taken as a
"need" is not determined only by biological
and uninfluencible factors. For example, in
those parts of the so-called Third World in
which there has been increased and extensive
public discussion of the consequences
of frequent childbearing on the well-being
and freedom of mothers, the perception that
a smaller family is a "basic need" of women
(and men too) has grown, and in this value
formation a combination of democracy, free
public media, and basic education (especially
female education) has been very potent.
The implications of this finding are
particularly important for rational consideration
of the so-called "world population
problem."49
Similar issues arise in dealing with environmental
problems. The threats that we
face call for organized international action
as well as changes in national policies, particularly
for better reflecting social costs in
prices and incentives. But they are also dependent
on value formation, related to public
discussions, both for their influence on
individual behavior and for bringing about
policy changes through the political process.
There are plenty of "social choice problems"
in all this, but in analyzing them, we have to
go beyond looking only for the best reflection
of given individual preferences, or the
most acceptable procedures for choices
based on those preferences. We need to
depart both from the assumption of given
preferences (as in traditional social choice
theory) and from the presumption that people
are narrowly self-interested homo eco-
480n this general question, see Rawls (1971) and
Thomas Scanlon (1982). See also Daniel Hausman and
Michael McPherson (1993).  49See the discussion and the literature cited in Sen
(1994 pp. 62-71), particularly Dasgupta (1993). See  also Adam Przeworski and Fernando Limongi's (1994)  international comparisons, which indicate a fairly strong  association between democracy and fertility reduction.  In the rapid reduction of the total fertility rate in the  Indian state of Kerala from 4.4 in the 1950's to the  present figure of 1.8 (a level similar to that in Britain  and France and lower than in the United States), value  formation related to education, democracy, and public  discussion has played a major part. While the fertility  rate has also come down in China (though not as much  as in Kerala), China's use of compulsion rather than  consensual progress has resulted in relatively high  infant-mortality rates (28 per thousand for boys and 33  per thousand for girls, compared with Kerala's 17 per  thousand for boys and 16 per thousand for girls in
1991). Such public dialogues are, however, hard to  achieve in many other parts of India, despite democ-  racy, because of the low level of elementary education,
especially for women. These and related issues are
discussed in Dreze and Sen (1995).