The federal income tax has been under
attack by the economics profession for more
than a decade. The attack comes from two
directions: supply-siders who believe that
progressive income taxation impairs economic
incentives,' and more traditional
economists who would substitute a progressive
expenditure tax for the income tax.2 At
one time, support for the expenditure tax
was confined to a few members of our profession,
including such distinguished names
as John Stuart Mill, Irving Fisher, Nicholas
Kaldor, and James Meade. Today, it is fair
to say that many, if not most, economists
favor the expenditure tax or a flat rate income
tax. This group has joined the opponents
of progressive taxation in the attack on
the income tax.
Despite an incessant barrage from both
groups, no country in the world is planning
to abandon the income tax or is even considering
a personal expenditure tax. A wave of
tax reform, beginning with the U.S. reform
in 1986, has been sweeping the world, aimed
at improving the income tax, not at eliminating
it. Tax preferences formerly regarded as
sacrosanct are being removed and there is a
distinct movement toward comprehensive income
taxation.3 However, individual income
tax rates are being cut, tax progressivity has
been declining almost everywhere, and reliance
on the income tax has been diminishing.

It will come as no surprise to this audience
that I approve of the base-broadening feature
of the current tax reform movement,
but I believe that the reduction in the redistributive
effect of the income tax has gone
too far. In this paper, I shall show that the
progressivity of the U.S. tax system-never
very pronounced, except during and immediately
after the two world wars-has been
declining for more than two decades and
that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 reversed
this decline, but only slightly. Consequently,
we have a long way to go to improve the
equity of the tax system. I believe this can be
done without punitive tax rates that will hurt
economic incentives.
I begin with a brief review of recent
changes in the U.S. distribution of income
and follow this with an analysis of the effect
of taxes on the income distribution. I next
examine arguments for and against the income
tax, with particular emphasis on its
effects on economic incentives and its merits
when compared with the expenditure tax. I
then evaluate the income tax as it emerged
from the 1986 tax reform and conclude with