Statistics (BLS) incorporated a matched model
price index for semiconductors into the Pro-
ducer Price Index (PPI) and since then the na-
tional accounts have relied on data from the
PPI. Reflecting long-standing BLS policy, his-
torical data were not revised backward. Semi-
conductor prices reported in the PPI prior to
1997 do not hold quality constant, failing to
capture the rapid semiconductor price decline
and the acceleration in 1994.
D. Computers
The introduction of the Personal Computer
(PC) by IBM in 1981 was a watershed event
in the deployment of information technology.
The sale of Intel's 8086-8088 microprocessor
to IBM in 1978 for incorporation into the PC
was a major business breakthrough for In-
tel. 12 In 1981 IBM licensed the MS-DOS
operating system from the Microsoft Corpo-
ration, founded by Bill Gates and Paul Allen
in 1975. The PC established an Intel/
Microsoft relationship that has continued up
to the present. In 1985 Microsoft released the
first version of Windows, its signature oper-
ating system for the PC, giving rise to the
Wintel (Windows-Intel) nomenclature for this
ongoing collaboration.
Mainframe computers, as well as PC's, have
come to rely heavily on logic chips for central
processing and memory chips for main mem-
ory. However, semiconductors account for less
than half of computer costs and computer prices
have fallen much less rapidly than semiconduc-
tor prices. Precise measures of computer prices
that hold product quality constant were intro-
duced into the NIPA in 1985 and the PPI during
the 1990's. The national accounts now rely on
PPI data, but historical data on computers from
the PPI, like the PPI data on semiconductors, do
not hold quality constant.
Gregory C. Chow (1967) pioneered the use of
hedonic techniques for constructing a constant
quality index of computer prices in research
conducted at IBM. Chow documented price de-
clines at more than 20 percent per year during
1960-1965, providing an initial glimpse of the
n'k ~~~~~~~~~13
remarkable behavior of computer prices. In
1985 the Bureau of Economic Analysis incor-
porated constant quality price indexes for com-
puters and peripheral equipment constructed by
Rosanne Cole et al. (1986) of IBM into the
NIPA. Triplett (1986) discussed the economic
interpretation of these indexes, bringing the
rapid decline of computer prices to the attention
of a very broad audience.
The BEA-IBM constant quality price index
for computers provoked a heated exchange be-
tween BEA and Edward F. Denison (1989), one
of the founders of national accounting method-
ology in the 1950's and head of the national
accounts at BEA from 1979 to 1982. Denison
sharply attacked the BEA-IBM methodology
and argued vigorously against the introduction
of constant quality price indexes into the na-
tional accounts.14 Allan Young (1989), then Di-
rector of BEA, reiterated BEA's rationale for
introducing constant quality price indexes.
Dulberger (1989) presented a more detailed
report on her research on the prices of computer
processors for the BEA-IBM project. Speed of
processing and main memory played central
roles in her model. Triplett (1989) provided an
exhaustive survey of research on hedonic price
indexes for computers. Robert J. Gordon (1989,
1990) gave an alternative model of computer
prices and identified computers and communi-
cations equipment, along with commercial air-
craft, as assets with the highest rates of price
decline.
Figure 2 gives BEA's constant quality index
of prices of computers and peripheral equip-
ment and its components, including main-
frames, PC's, storage devices, other peripheral
equipment, and terminals. The decline in com-
puter prices follows the behavior of semicon-
ductor prices presented in Figure 1, but in much
attenuated form. The 1995 acceleration in the
computer price decline parallels the accelera-
tion in the semiconductor price decline that
resulted from the changeover from a three-year
product cycle to a two-year cycle in 1995.