includes imputations for the service flows from
durable goods, including IT products, employed
in the household and government sectors.
The imputations for services of IT equipment
are based on the cost of capital for IT described
in more detail below. The cost of capital is
multiplied by the nominal value of IT capital
stock to obtain the imputed service flow from IT
products. In the business sector this accrues as
capital income to the firms that employ these
products as inputs. In the household and gov-
ernment sectors the flow of capital income must
be imputed. This same type of imputation is
used for housing in the NIPA. The rental value
of renter-occupied housing accrues to real es-
tate firms as capital income, while the rental
value of owner-occupied housing is imputed to
households.
Current dollar GDP in Table 1 is $9.8 tril-
lions in 1999, including imputations, and real
output growth averaged 3.46 percent for the
period 1948-1999. These magnitudes can be
compared to the current dollar value of $9.3
trillions in 1999 and the average real growth
rate of 3.40 percent for the period 1948-1999
for the official GDP. Table 1 presents the cur-
rent dollar value and price indexes of the GDP
and IT output. This includes outputs of invest-
ment goods in the form of computers, software,
communications equipment, and non-IT invest-
ment goods. It also includes outputs of non-IT
consumption goods and services as well as im-
puted IT capital service flows from households
and governments.
The most striking feature of the data in Table
1 is the rapid price decline for computer invest-
ment, 17.1 percent per year from 1959 to 1995.
Since 1995 this decline has almost doubled to
32.1 percent per year. By contrast the relative
price of software has been flat for much of
the period and began to fall only in the late
1980's. The price of communications equip-
ment behaves similarly to the software price,
while the consumption of capital services from
computers and software by households and gov-
ernments shows price declines similar to com-
puter investment.
The top panel of Table 2 summarizes the
growth rates of prices and quantities for major
output categories for 1990-1995 and 1995-
1999. Business investments in computers,
software, and communications equipment are
the largest categories of IT spending. House-
holds and governments have also spent siz-
able amounts on computers, software,
communications equipment and the services
of information technology. Figure 4 shows
that the output of software is the largest IT