Friedman told us that all macro-economic
policy needs to do, all it should try to do, is
to make nominal national income grow
steadily at the natural rate of growth of
aggregate supply. This would sooner or
later result in price stability. Steady price
deflation would be even better, he said,
because it would eliminate the socially
wasteful incentive to economize money
holdings. In either case, unemployment
will converge to its natural rate, and
wages and prices will settle into steady
trends. Under this policy, whatever unemployment
the market produces is the correct
result. No tradeoff, no choice, no
agonizing decisions.
I have argued this evening that a substantial
amount of the unemployment
compatible with zero inflation is involuntary
an(l nonoptimal. This is, in my
opinion, true whether or not the inflations
associated with lower rates of unemployment
are steady or ever-accelerating.
Neither macro-economic policy makers,
nor the elected officials and electorates to
whom they are responsible, can avoid
weighing the costs of unemployment
against those of inflation. As Phelps has
pointed out, this social choice has an intertemporal
dimension. The social costs of
involutionary unemployment are mostly
obvious and immediate. The social costs
of inflation come later.
What are they? Economists' answers
have been remarkably vague, even though
the prestige of the profession has reinforced
the popular view that inflation leads
ultimately to catastrophe. Here indeed is
aT case where abstract economic theory
has a powerful hold on public opinion
and policy. The prediction that at low
unemployment rates inflation will accelerate
toward ultimate disaster is a theoretical
deduction with little empirical
support. In fact the weight of econometric
evidence has been against acceleration,
let alone disaster. Yet the deduction has
been convincing enough to persuade this
country to give up billions of dollars of
annual output and to impose sweeping
legal controls on prices and wages. Seldom
has a society made such large immediate
and tangible sacrifices to avert an ill defined,
uncertain, eventual evil.
According to economic theory, the
ultimate social cost of anticipated inflation
is the wasteful use of resources to
economize holdings of currency and other
noninterest-bearing means of payment.
I suspect that intelligent laymen would
be utterly astounded if they realized that
this is the great evil economists are talking
about. They have imagined a much more
devastating cataclysm, with Vesuvius
vengefully punishing the sinners below.
Extra trips between savings banks and
commercial banks? What an anti-climax!
With means of payment-currency plus
demand deposits-equal currently to 20
percent of GNP, an extra percentage point
of anticipated inflation embodied in nominal
interest rates produces in principle a
social cost of 2/10 of I percent of GNP
per year. This is an outside estimate. An
unknown, but substantial, share of the
stock of money belongs to holders who are
not trying to economize cash balances and
are not near any margin where they would
be induced to spend resources for this purpose.
These include hoarders of large denomination
currency, about one-third of
the total currency in public hands, for
reasons of privacy, tax evasion, or illegal
activity. They include tradesmen and
consumers whose working balances turn
over too rapidly or are too small to justify
any effort to invest them in interestbearing
assets. They include corporations
who, once they have been induced to
undertake the fixed costs of a sharp-pencil
money management department, are already
minimizing their cash holdings.
They include businessmen who are in fact
being paid interest on demand deposits,