although it takes the form of preferential
access to credit and other bank services.
But, in case anyone still regards the waste
of resources in unnecessary transactions
between money and interest-bearing financial
assets as one of the major economic
problems of the day, there is a simple and
straightforward remedy, the payment of
interest on demand deposits and possibly,
with ingenuity, on currency too.
The ultimate disaster of inflation would
be the breakdown of the monetary payments
system, necessitating a currency
reform. Such episodes have almost invariably
resulted from real economic catastrophes-
wars, defeats, revolutions, reparations-
not from the mechanisms of
wage-price push with which we are concerned.
Acceleration is a scare word, conveying
the image of a rush into hyperinflation
as relentlessly deterministic and
monotonic as the motion of falling bodies.
Realistic attention to the disaggregated
and stochastic nature of wage and price
movements suggests that they will show
diverse and irregular fluctuations around
trends that are difficult to discern and
extrapolate. The central trends, history
suggests, can accelerate for a long, long
time without generating hyper-inflations
destructive of the payments mechanism.
Unanticipated inflation, it is contended,
leads to mistaken estimates of relative
prices and consequently to misallocations
of resources. An example we have already
discussed is the alleged misallocation of
time by workers who over-estimate their
real wages. The same error would lead to
a general over-supply by sellers who contract
for future deliveries without taking
correct account of the increasing prices of
the things they must buy in order to fulfill
the contract. Unanticipated deflation
would cause similar miscalculations and
misallocations. Indeed, people can make
these same mistakes about relative prices
even when the price level is stable. The
mistakes are more likely, or the more
costly to avoid, the greater the inflationary
trend. There are costs in setting
and announcing new prices. In an inflationary
environment price changes must
be made more frequently-a new catalog
twice a year instead of one, or some formula
for automatic escalation of announced
prices. Otherwise, with the interval
between announcements unchanged,
the average misalignment of relative prices
will be larger the faster the inflation. The
same problem would arise with rapid
deflation.
Unanticipated inflation and deflationand
unanticipated changes in relative
prices-are also sources of transfers of
wealth. I will not review here the rich and
growing empirical literature on this subject.
Facile generalizations about the progressivity
or equity of inflationary transfers
are hazardous; certainly inflation does
not merit the cliche that it is "the cruelest
tax." Let us not forget that unemployment
has distributional effects as well as deadweight
losses.
Some moralists take the view that the
government has promised to maintain the
purchasing power of its currency, but this
promise is their inference rather than any
pledge written on dollar bills or in the
Constitution. Some believe so strongly in
this implicit contract that they are willing
to suspend actual contracts in the name of
anti-inflation.
I have long contended that the government
should make low-interest bonds of
guaranteed purchasing power available
for savers and pension funds who wish to
avoid the risks of unforeseen inflation. The
common objection to escalated bonds is
that they would diminish the built-in
stability of the system. The stability in
question refers to the effects on aggregate
real demand, ceteris paribus, of a change in
the price level. The Pigou effect tells us
that government bondholders whose
wealth is diminished by inflation will spend
less. This brake on old-fashioned gap