reduce relative wages to eliminate the excess
supply is moderated by the effect that such a
reduction would have on quits and costly turnover,
even when the resulting vacancies can be
readily filled from the ranks of the unemployed.
Equally relevant are the consequences in terms
of loss of morale and good will, in part for reasons
which have been elaborated by the literature
on implicit contracts (see Robert Gordon).
Thus, while there will be some tendency for the
rate of change of wages to fall, the more so the
larger the unemployment-at least in an economy
like the United States where there are no
overpowering centralized unions-that tendency
is severely damped.

And whether, given an unemployment rate
significantly and persistently above the noninflationary
level, the rate of change of wages would,
eventually, tend to turn negative and decline
without bound or whether it would tend to an
asymptote is a question that I doubt the empirical
evidence will ever answer. The one experiment
we have had the Great Depression suggests
the answer is negative, and while I admit that,
for a variety of reasons, that evidence is muddied,
I hope that we will never have the opportunity
for a second, clean experiment.
In any event, what is really important for
practical purposes is not the long-run equilibrium
relation as such, but the speed with which it
is approached. Both the model sketched out and
the empirical evidence suggest that the process
of acceleration or deceleration of wages when
unemployment differs from the noninflationary
rate will have more nearly the character of a
crawl than of a gallop. It will suffice to recall in
this connection that there was excess demand
pressure in the United States at least from 1965
to mid- 1970, and during that period the growth
of inflation was from some 1.5 to only about 5.5
percent per year. And the response to the excess
supply pressure from mid-1970 to early 1973,
and from late 1974 to date was equally sluggish.
B. The Power of Self-Stabilizing Mechanisms:
The Evidence from Econometric Models
There remains to consider the monetarists'
initial criticism of Keynesianism, to wit, that
even without high wage flexibility, the system's
response to demand shocks is small and shortlived,
thanks to the power of the Hicksian mechanism.
Here it must be acknowledged that every
one of the monetarists' criticisms of early,
simpleminded Keynesianism has proved in
considerable measure correct.
With regard to the interest elasticity of demand
for money, post-Keynesian developments
in the theory of money, and in particular, the
theoretical contributions of William Baumol,
James Tobin, Merton Miller, and Daniel Orr,
point to a modest value of around one-half to
one-third, and empirical studies (see for example,
Stephen Goldfeld) are largely consistent
with this prediction (at least until 1975!). Similarly,
the dependence of consumption on longrun,
or life cycle, income and on wealth,
together with the high marginal tax rates of the
postwar period, especially the corporate tax,
and leakages through imports, lead to a rather
low estimate of the multiplier.
Last but not least, both theoretical and empirical
work, reflected in part in econometric models,
have largely vindicated the monetarist
contention that interest effects on demand are
pervasive and substantial. Thus, in the construction
and estimation of the MIT-Penn-Social
Science Research Council (MPS) econometric
model of the United States, we found evidence
of effects, at least modest, on nearly every component
of aggregate demand. One response to
money supply changes that is especially important
in the MPS, if somewhat controversial, is
via interest rates on the market value of all assets
and thus on consumption.

There is, therefore, substantial agreement that
in the United States the Hicksian mechanism is
fairly effective in limiting the effect of shocks,
and that the response of wages and prices to
excess demand or supply will also work gradually
toward eliminating largely, if not totally,
any effect on employment. But in the view of
nonmonetarists, the evidence overwhelmingly
supports the conclusion that the interim response
is still of significant magnitude and of considerable
duration, basically because the wheels of
the offsetting mechanism grind slowly. To be
sure, the first link of the mechanism, the rise in
short-term rates, gets promptly into play and