principles on which it operates, but also
be acquainted with the details of its actual
design.

A new element has entered the picture
in recent years-the adoption of methods
of modern econiomic analysis by private
business. Corporate support of economic
research goes as far back as the early
1920's when Wesley Mitchell founded the
National Bureau. However, it is not this
concern for broad issues of public policies
or even the general interest in economic
growth and business fluctuations that I
have in mind, but rather the fast-spreading
use of advanced methods of Operations
Research and of so-called Systems' Analysis.
Some of the standard concepts and
analytical devices of economic theory first
found their way into the curricula of our
business schools and soon after that, sophisticated
management began to put

them into practice. While academic theorists
are content with the formulation of
general principles, corporate operations
researchers and practical systems' analysts
have to answer questions pertaining to
specific real situations. Demand for economic
data to be used in practical business
planning is growing at an accelerated pace.
It is a high quality demand: business users
in most instances possess first-hand technical
knowledge of the area to which the data
they ask for refer. Moreover, this demand
is usually "effective." Profit-making business
is willing and able to pay the costs of
gathering the inlformation it wants to have.
This raises the thorny question of public
access to privately collected data and of
the proper division of labor and cooperation
between government and business in
that fast-expanding field. Under the inexorable
pressure of rising practical demand,
these problems will be solved in one
way or another. Our economy will be surveyed
and mapped in all its many dimensions
on a larger and larger scale.
Economists should be prepared to take
a leading role in shaping this major social
enterprise not as someone else's spokesmen
and advisers, but on their own behalf.
They have failed to do this up to now. The
Conference of Federal Statistics Users
organized several years ago had business,
labor, and many other groups represented
among its members, but not economists as
such. How can we expect our needs to be
satisfied if our voices are not heard?
We, I mean the academic economists,
are ready to expound, to any one ready to
lend an ear, our views on problems of public
policy: give advice on the best ways to
maintain full employment, to fight inflation,
to foster economic growth. We should
be equally prepared to share with the
wider public the hopes and disappointments
which accompany the advance of
our own often desperately difficult, but
always exciting intellectual enterprise.
This public has amply demonstrated its
readiness to back the pursuit of knowledge.
It will lend its generous support to our
venture too, if we take the trouble to
explain what it is all about.
REFERENCE

F. H. Hahn, "Some Adjustment Problems,"
Econometrica, Jan. 1970, 38, 1-2.