we would cut defense spending. In 1996, when
health care expenditures are almost four times
as large as the defense budget, this argument
is not heard as often. Because it denies the
inevitability of choice, the romantic point of
view is increasingly seen as impotent to deal
with the problems of health care."2
To be sure, it is not clear whether economic
research or the force of circumstances is bringing
about the change in point of view. I suspect
that there is a synergistic relationship in which
the former provides the language to give
expression to the latter. Or, as Max Weber
(1915; reprinted 1946) wrote, material and
ideal interests are the tracks on which society
rides, but ideas throw the switches (p. 280).
The monotechnic point of view, found frequently
among physicians, engineers, and others
trained in the application of a particular
technology fails to recognize the diversity of
human wants, or acknowledge the difference
between what is technically best and what is
socially desirable." "Optimal" care is defined
as the point where the marginal benefit is zero,
ignoring the fact that resources used for health
care have alternative uses that might yield
greater benefit. The "production" of health is
viewed narrowly as a function of inputs of
medical care, and the appropriate input mix
is assumed to be determined by technology
without regard to relative prices, explicit or
implicit. For example, Feldstein found that average
lengths of stay in British hospitals were
uniform across regions despite large regional
differences in the pressures for admission.'4
The monotechnic view often fails to consider
the heterogeneity of preferences, even
though for many health problems there are alternative
interventions: one drug versus another,
drugs versus surgery, or even "watchful
waiting" versus any intervention. Under the
influence of economists and other behavioral
scientists, physicians are now making such
choices with more attention to patient differences
in time preference, attitudes toward risk,
tolerance of pain, functional needs, and other
characteristics.
Among our specific tools, one of the most
useful is the idea of the margin. The key to
gaining acceptance for this principle is to have
people realize that most decisions involve a
little more or a little less, and that they will
make better decisions if they look at the costs
and benefits associated with having a little
more or a little less. This formulation is more
effective than postulating "maximization,"
which economists find useful for classroom or
research purposes, but sounds unreal to most
noneconomists.
David M. Eddy's research on the frequency
with which women should get Pap smears provides
a fine example of the use of marginal (or
incremental) analysis to assist in medical
decision-making. This screening test for cervical
cancer is of proven safety and effectiveness,
and before Eddy's work appeared most
experts recommended that women obtain this
test annually. Using mathematical models and
clinical studies of the natural history of the disease,
Eddy (a physician with extensive training
in operations research and economics)
calculated the incremental cost of 1 additional
year of life expectancy with screening regimes
ranging from once every 6 months to once
every 5 years. The results were striking. Some
screening has a high yield at low incremental
cost, but as the frequency of screening is increased
from once every 2 years to once a year
the incremental cost rises to close to $1 million
per additional year of life expectancy (Eddy,
1980, 1987, 1990).15
The impact of Eddy's research on health
policy is worth noting. The American Cancer
Society accepted his conclusions and the Society'
s recommendation to screen once every
3 years made the front page of the New York
'2 As a sign of the times, Sweden, Norway, Finland,
and the World Health Organization are sponsoring the first
international conference on priorities in health care in October
1996.
' Economists fall into their own monotechnic trap
when they offer policy advice under the assumption that
efficiency is society's only goal.
'4 See Feldstein (1967).
'5 To put this in perspective, consider the choice between
tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) and its cheaper
alternative, streptokinase, as the treatment to dissolve a
clot during a heart attack. The latest studies suggest that
the incremental cost of TPA rather than streptokinase is
$33,000 per year of life extended (D. B. Mark et al., 1995).
In the United States TPA is usually the treatment of
choice, but Canadians use streptokinase.