seem to be too Panglossian a view of reality,
let me offer two observations which make it
clear that we emphatically do not believe
that all need be for the best in this best of all
possible worlds.
First, let me recall the observation that
real markets are rarely, if ever, perfectly contestable.
Contestability is merely a broader
ideal, a benchmark of wider applicability
than is perfect competition. To say that contestable
oligopolies behave ideally and that
contestable monopolies have some incentives
for doing so is not to imply that this is even
nearly true of all oligopolies or of unregulated
monopolies in reality.
Second, while the theory extends the domain
of the invisible hand in some directions,
it unexpectedly restricts it in others.
This brings me to the penultimate contrast I
wish to offer here between the earlier views
and those that emerge from our analysis.
The older theoretical analysis seems to have
considered the invisible hand to be a rather
weak intratemporal allocator of resources, as
we have seen. The mere presence of unregulated
monopoly or oligopoly was taken to be
sufficient per se to imply that resources are
likely to be misallocated within a given time
period. But where the market structure is such
as to yield a satisfactory allocation of resources
within the period, it may have seemed that it
can, at least in theory, do a good job of
intertemporal resource allocation. In the absence
of any externalities, persistent and
asymmetric information gaps, and of interference
with the workings of capital markets,
the amounts that will be invested for the
future may appear to be consistent with
Pareto optimality and efficiency in the supply
of outputs to current and future generations.
However, our analysis shows that where
there are economies of scale in the production
of durable capital, intertemporal contestable
monopoly, which may perform relatively
well in the single period, cannot be
depended upon to perform ideally as time
passes. In particular, we will see that the
least costly producer is in the long run
vulnerable to entry or replacement by rivals
whose appearance is inefficient because it
wastes valuable social resources.
There is one last contrast between the
newer analyses and the older theory which I
am most anxious to emphasize. In the older
theory, the nature of the industry structure
was not normally explained by the analysis.
It was, in effect, taken to be given exogenously,
with the fates determining, apparently
capriciously, that one industry will
be organized as an oligopoly, another as a
monopoly and a third as a set of monopolistic
competitors. Assuming that this destiny
had somehow been revealed, the older
analyses proceeded to investigate the consequences
of the exogenously given industry
structure for pricing, outputs, and other decisions.
2
The new analyses are radically different in
this respect. In our analysis, among others,
an industry's structure is determined explicitly,
endogenously, and simultaneously
with the pricing, output, advertising, and
other decisions of the firms of which it is
constituted. This, perhaps, is one of the prime
contributions of the new theoretical analyses.
I. Characteristics of Contestable Markets
Perhaps a misplaced instinct for melodrama
has led me to say so much about
contestable markets without even hinting
what makes a market contestable. But I can
postpone the definition no longer. A contestable
market is one into which entry is
absolutely free, and exit is absolutely costless.
We use "freedom of entry" in Stigler's sense,
not to mean that it is costless or easy, but
that the entrant suffers no disadvantage in
terms of production technique or perceived
product quality relative to the incumbent,