the ephemeral substantive content of
the argument behind the formidable front
of algebraic signs.

Professional journals have opened wide
their pages to papers written in mathematical
language; colleges train aspiring
young economists to use this language;
graduate schools require its knowledge and
reward its use. The mathematical modelbuilding
industry has grown into one of the
most prestigious, possibly the most prestigious
branch of economics. Construction of
a typical theoretical model can be handled
now as a routine assembly job. All principal
components such as production functions,
consumption and utility functions
come in several standard types; so does
the optional equipment as, for example,
"factor augmentation"-to take care of
technological change. This particular device
is, incidentally, available in a simple
exponential design or with a special automatic
regulator known as the "Kennedy
function." Any model can be modernized
with the help of special attachments. One
popular way to upgrade a simple one-sector
model is to bring it out in a two-sector version
or even in a still more impressive form
of the "n-sector," that is, many-sector
class.

In the presentation of a new model,
attention nowadays is usually centered on
a step-by-step derivation of its formal
properties. But if the author-or at least
the referee who recommended the manuscript
for publication-is technically competent,
such mathematical manipulations,
however long and intricate, can even without
further checking be accepted as
correct. Nevertheless, they are usually
spelled out at great length. By the time it
comes to interpretation of the substantive
conclusions, the assumptions on which the
model has been based are easily forgotten.
But it is precisely the empirical validity
of these assumrptions on which the usefulness
of the entire exercise depends.
What is really needed, in most cases, is
a very difficult and seldom very neat
assessment and verification of these assumptions
in terms of observed facts. Here
mathematics cannot help and because of
this, the interest and enthusiasm of the
model builder suddenly begins to flag:
"If you do not like my set of assumptions,
give me another and I will gladly make you
another model; have your pick."
Policy oriented models, in contrast to
purely descriptive ones, are gaining favor,
however nonoperational they may be.
This, I submit, is in part because the
choice of the final policy objectives-the
selection and justification of the shape of
the so-called objective function-is, and
rightly so, considered based on normative
judgment, not on factual analysis. Thus,
the model builder can secure at least some
convenient assumptions without running
the risk of being asked to justify them on
empirical grounds.

To sum up with the words of a recent
president of the Econometric Society,
" . . . the achievements of economic theory
in the last two decades are both impressive
and in many ways beautiful. But it cannot
be denied that there is something scandalous
in the spectacle of so many people
refining the analysis of economic states
which they give no reason to suppose will
ever, or have ever, come about.... It
is an unsatisfactory and slightly dishonest
state of affairs."

But shouldn't this harsh judgment be
suspended in the face of the impressive
volume of econometric work? The answer
is decidedly no. This work can be in
general characterized as an attempt to
compensate for the glaring weakness of
the data base available to us by the widest
possible use of more and more sophisticated
statistical techniques. Alongside the
mounting pile of elaborate theoretical
models we see a fast-growing stock of
equally intricate statistical tools. These