THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
would borrow against future labor income if
they could-enjoy a utility gain equivalent to a
4-percent perpetual increase in consumption.
Oddly, the very wealthy can also gain, as much
as 2 percent. Krusell and Smith conjecture that
this is due to the higher interest rates implied by
the overall decrease in precautionary savings
and capital. Finally, there is a large group of
middle wealth households that are made worse
off by eliminating aggregate risk.
These calculations are sensitive-especially at
the poor end of the distribution-to what is assumed
about the incomes of unemployed people.
Krusell and Smith calibrate this, roughly, to current
U.S. unemployment insurance replacement
rates. If one were estimating the costs of the depression
of the 1930's, before the current welfare
system was in place, lower rates would be used
and the cost estimates would increase sharply.20 It
would also be interesting to use a model like this
to examine the trade-offs between reductions in
aggregate risk and an improved welfare system.
Storesletten et al. (2001) study distributional
influences on welfare cost estimates with methods
that are closely related to Krusell and
Smith's, but they obtain larger estimates of the
gains from removing all aggregate shocks. They
use an overlapping generations setup with 43
working age generations, in which the youngest
cohort is always credit constrained. In such a
setting, the young are helpless in the face of
shocks of all kinds and reductions in variance
can yield large welfare gains. But if the age
effects are averaged out to reflect the importance
of intrafamily lending (as I think they
should be) the gains estimated by Storesletten et
al. under log utility are no larger than Krusell
and Smith's.21 In contrast to earlier studies,
however, the Storesletten et al. model implies
that estimated welfare gains rise faster than
proportionately as risk aversion is increased:
From Exhibit 2, for example, the average gain
increases from 0.6 of a percent to 2.5 as y is
increased from 2 to 4.
Two features of the theory interact to bring
this about.22 First, and most crucial, is a differ-
20 See Satyajit Chatterjee and Dean Corbae (2000).  21 Based on Exhibits 2 and A.3.1.
22 Storesletten et al. do a good job of breaking the  differences into intelligible pieces. I also found the example  explicitly solved in Krebs (2002) very helpful in this regard.  ence in the way reductions in the variance of
aggregate shocks affect risks faced at the individual
level. In the Storesletten et al. simulations,
a bad realization of the aggregate
productivity shock increases the conditional
variance of the idiosyncratic risk that people
face, so aggregate and individual risks are compounded
in a way that Krusell and Smith rule
out. A second difference is that idiosyncratic
shocks are assumed to have a random walk
component, so their effects are long lasting. A
bad aggregate shock increases the chances that
a young worker will draw a bad individual
shock, and if he does he will suffer its effects
throughout his prime working years.
The effects of these two assumptions are
clear: They convert small, transient shocks at
the aggregate level into large, persistent shocks
to the earnings of a small fraction of households.
Whether they are realistic is question of
fact. That individual earnings differences are
highly persistent has been clear since Lee
Lillard and Robert Willis's pioneering (1978)
study. The fanning out over time of the earnings
and consumption distributions within a cohort
that Angus Deaton and Christina Paxson (1994)
document is striking evidence of a sizeable,
uninsurable random walk component in earnings.
The relation of the variance of earnings
shocks to the aggregate state of the economy,
also emphasized by N. Gregory Mankiw (1986)
in connection with the equity premium puzzle,
has only recently been studied empirically.
Storesletten et al. find a negative relation over
time between cross-section earnings means and
standard deviations in Panel Studies of Income
Dynamics data. Costas Meghir and Luigi
Pistaferri (2001) obtain smaller estimates, but
also conclude that "the unemployment rate and
the variance of permanent [earnings] shocks
appear to be quite synchronized" in the 1970's
and 1980's.
These issues are central to an accurate description
of the risk situation that individual
agents face, and hence to the assessment of
welfare gains from policies that alter this situation.
The development of tractable equilibrium
models capable of bringing cross-section and
panel evidence to bear on this and other macroeconomic
questions is an enormous step forward.
But Krusell and Smith find only modest
effects of heterogeneity on the estimates of wel-
10
MARCH 2003