THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
the realized net cash balance of Social Security
is added to the trust fund and another year is
added at the end of the 75-year horizon. With a
constant tax rate and the current benefit formula,
the added year is in worse fiscal shape
than the average of years before. Indeed of the
current 75-year actuarial deficit of 1.9 percent
of taxable payroll, a full 1.1 percent is due to the
fact that the projection now goes 20 years fur-  ther into the future than it did in 1983.
The 1983 legislation included future decreases
in benefits by increasing the age for full
benefits. At the time of the 1983 legislation,
there was still a tax rate increase on the books.
That was kept and took effect in 1990. Indeed
from the initiation of the program in 1935 until
1990, there was always a future tax rate increase
on the books. Given the political ease of raising
benefits or cutting taxes, and the political difficulty
of raising taxes or cutting benefits, having
future tax rate increases and future benefit decreases
on the books lowers the political cost of
preserving balance, since it is easier to legislate
future pain than current pain. Avoiding a recurrence
of actuarial imbalance a short time after
reform requires a substantial trust fund at the
end of the projection period, so that it can fall
for awhile without triggering imbalance,
and/or a change in the time shape of taxes and
benefits. A changed time shape can be legislated
directly (as we legislated an increase in
the full benefit age in 1983 and have legislated
future tax increases) or could be expected
from the adoption of further automatic
adjustments (for example, by including an
adjustment for life expectancy).
Before considering the choice between legislated
changes and automatic adjustment, let us
consider the allocation in a complete-market
Arrow-Debreu equilibrium. In the model, outcomes
are fully specified. Given subjective beliefs
about the probability structure of the states
of nature, one can express the value of equilibrium
for an individual. Also fully specified is
standard modeling of incomplete markets,
which replaces complete market auctioneerannounced
future allocations by accurate predictions
of future market equilibria as repeated
trading unfolds. Time-inconsistent individual
behavior does not interfere with the ability to
describe outcomes in this way, although it will
generally interfere with the efficiency properties
of equilibrium.  Most social security systems lack the completeness
that is needed to specify outcomes
solely in terms of underlying economic variables
(and the stochastic structure of states of
nature). U.S. legislation determines the payroll
tax rate for each year into the indefinite future.
The level of earnings that are subject to tax each
year is automatically indexed-thereby relating
taxable earnings to economic outcomes.63 Legislation
also sets down the rules for benefit
payments in terms of individual earnings histories
and price and wage indices. While each part
is fully specified, no mechanism ensures that the
Social Security budget constraint is satisfied.
Thus, there is the expectation that sooner or
later something will have to be changed. That is,
in order to model future labor and consumption,
we need to model future legislative outcomes.
This is hard.64 In some exercises, the Congressional
Budget Office has been instructed by law
to ignore some possible future legislation (such
as extensions of sunsets of income tax changes).
But this is not a satisfactory solution for academic
analysts, nor for individuals who are
making lifetime plans.
We have a theory using incomplete contracts
as part of the theory of the firm. In that theory
agents have well-defined property rights and
well-specified behaviors that determine the outcomes
not covered by the contracts, With incomplete
legislation, the future legislative
process plays a key role in determining outcomes
that are incompletely specified.6 Analyzing
an equilibrium that includes a legislative
process is difficult-requiring modeling the interaction
of the personal preferences of elected
officials with their concerns about reelection, as
well as election outcomes (R. Douglas Arnold,
1990). It is not that this is unknowable in principle,
but that we are a long way from a genu-
63 Some of the income tax revenue from the taxation of
benefits goes to Social Security as well. This revenue is  dependent on future income tax rates.  64 In the list of reasons why members of the Panel on  Privatization of Social Security of the National Academy of  Social Insurance disagreed on the advantages of individual  accounts, a central element was the divergence of views on  the political implications of accounts-particularly the sus-  tainability both of rules for the accounts and of the structure  of traditional benefits (Diamond, 1999).  65 The legislative process can also change what is com-  pletely specified, but at least we can analyze what happens  if there are not any changes.
18
MARCH 2004