nificantly positive slope-but cannot readily
account for changes in unemployment. Furthermore,
it cannot be reconciled with the wellknown
fact that rising unemployment is
accompanied by a fall, not by a rise in quits, nor
with the role played by temporary layoffs to
which Martin Feldstein has recently called
attention. Again, his competitive model of
the commodity market, accepted also in The
General Theorv, implies that changes in real
wages. adjusted for long-run productivity trend,
should be significantly negatively correlated
with cyclical changes in employment and output
and with changes in money wages. But as early
as 1938, John Dunlop showed that this conclusion
was rejected by some eighty years of British
experience and his results have received some
support in more recent tests of Ronald Bodkin
for the United States and Canada. Similar tests
of my own, using quarterly data, provide striking
confirmation that for the last two decades
from the end of the Korean War until 1973, the
association of trend adjusted real compensations
of the private nonfarm sector with either
employment or the change in nominal compensation
is prevailingly positive and very significantly
so.'
This evidence can, instead, be accounted for
by the oligopolistic pricing model-according
to which price is determined by long-run minimum
average cost up to a mark-up reflecting
entry-preventing considerations (see the author,
1958) coupled with some lags in the adjustment
of prices to costs. This model implies that
firms respond to a change in demand by endeavoring
to adjust output and employment, without
significant changes in prices relative to wages;
and the resulting changes in available jobs have
their initial impact not on wages but rather on
unemployment by way of layoffs and recalls and
through changes in the level of vacancies, and
hence on the length of average search time.
If, in the process, vacancies rise above a critical
level, or "natural rate," firms will endeavor
to reduce them by outbidding each other, thereby
raising the rate of change of wages. Thus, as
long as jobs and vacancies remain above, and
unemployment remains below, some critical
level which might be labeled the "noninflationary
rate" (see the author and Lucas Papademos,
1975), wages and prices will tend to accelerate.
If, on the other hand, jobs fall below, and unemployment
rises above, the noninflationary rate,
firms finding that vacancies are less than optimal
-in the limit the unemployed queuing outside
the gate will fill them instantly will have an
incentive to reduce their relative wage offer. But
in this case, in which too much labor is looking
for too few jobs, the trend toward a sustained
decline in the rate of growth of wages is likely
to be even weaker than the corresponding acceleration
when too many jobs are bidding for too
few people. The main reason is the nonhomogeneity
of labor. By far the largest and more
valuable source of labor supply to a firm consists
of those already employed who are not readily
interchangeable with the unemployed and, in
contrast with them, are concerned with protecting
their earnings and not with reestablishing
full employment. For these reasons, and because
the first to quit are likely to be the best workers, a
reduction of the labor force can, within limits, be
accomplished more economically, not by reducing
wages to generate enough quits, but by
firing or, when possible, by layoffs which insure
access to a trained labor force when demand
recovers. More generally, the inducement to
'Thus, in a logarithmic regression of private nonfarm
hourly compensation deflated by the private nonfarimi
deflator on output per man-hour, time, and private nonfarm
employment, after correcting for first-order serial correlation,
the latter variable has a coefficient of . 17 and a t-ratio
of 5. Similar though less significant results were found for
manufacturing. If employment is replaced by the change in
nominal compensation, its coefficient is .40 with a t-ratio of
6.5. Finally, if the change in compensation is replaced by
the change in price, despite the negative bias from error
of measurement of price, the coefficient of this variable is
only - .09 with an entirely insignificant t-ratio of .7. The
period after 1 973 has been omitted from the tests as irrelevant
for our purposes, since the inflation was driven primnarily by
an exogenous price shock rather than by excess demand. As a
result of the shock, prices, and to some extent wages, rose
rapidly while employment and real wages fell. Thus, the
addition of the last two years tends to increase spuriously the
positive association between real wages and employment,
and to decrease that between real wages and the change in
inominal wages or prices.