budget committees of Congress laying out
recommended short- and longer-run economic
goals for the nation and discussing
combinations of monetary and fiscal strategies
to achieve them. The Fed's report should
be an important input to congressional deliberations
on fiscal policy.
Sixth, strive for a government-wide official
economic forecast to be updated on a
regular schedule. The main purpose of the
common forecast would be to reduce the
confusion generated by conflicting estimates,
but the increased interaction between the
Department of Economic Affairs, the Congressional
Budget Office, and the Federal
Reserve necessary to create such a forecast
would increase mutual understanding of what
is happening to the economy and what the
goals of policy should be. Occasionally, it
might be necessary for one of the agencies to
dissent and explain why it disagreed with the
forecast, but these occasions are likely to be
infrequent. There should also be more attention
than at present to the consequences for
policy of the forecast being wrong.
Finally, bring choices explicitly into the
decision process, both in executive branch deliberations
and, especially, in Congress. Those
proposing spending increases or tax reductions
should routinely be required to specify
what is to be given up and to offer both the
benefit and its cost as a package. In other
words, proposals should be deficit neutral.
V. What Economists Can Do
For their part, how can economists be
more useful in the policy process? The press
and politicians often sound as if they are
telling us to work harder: go back to your
computers and don't come out until you
known how the economy really works and
can give us reliable forecasts. But economists
know that the economic system is incredibly
complicated, and that increasing global interdependence
and rapidly changing technologies
and public attitudes are not making it
easier to understand. It is not likely in our
lifetimes that anyone will happen on a
paradigm that explains everything, or even
that forecasting will become appreciably
more accurate. Like the medical profession,
which also deals with an incredibly complex
system, we economists just have to keep
applying our imperfect knowledge as carefully
as possible and learning from the results.
Both doctors and economists need
humility, but neither should abandon their
patients to the quacks.
The objective of economists ought to be to
raise the level of debate on economic policy,
to make clear what they know and do not
know, and to increase the chances of policy
decisions that make the economy work better.
Much of the time that means telling the
public and politicians what they would rather
not hear: hard choices must be made. We
are stuck with being the dismal science.
Increased effort in three directions would
make economics more useful in the policy
process. First, economists should put much
more emphasis on their areas of agreement.
The press admittedly makes this difficult.
Agreement is not news, and the press' stereotype
of economists' diversity of views is so
entrenched that they will go to great lengths
to scare up a lonely dissenter to an almost
universally held economic platitude and give
her equal time.
Economists realize that the breakthrough
insights around which "schools" are built
are at best partial visions of the truth, but
our training leads us to elaborate and differentiate
these insights, to explain to ourselves
and to others where they lead in
different directions, not where they come
together. Yet areas of agreement are
wide -even in macroeconomics-and a
major effort to make this clearer to ourselves
and our audience would be useful.
Second, economists should devote more
serious attention to increasing the basic economic
literacy of the public, the media, and
the political community. While the print media
seem to me increasingly knowledgeable and
sophisticated about economic issues, television,
where most people get most of their
information, lags far behind. Television
coverage of the economy is heavily weighted
to isolated economic statistics reported without
context-the wholesale price index increased
two-tenths of a percent in October
-and talking heads disagreeing, briefly, for
some obscure reason. Some of the best newscasters
appear to have bad cases of economics
phobia.