evils arising from the principle of popu-
lation may not be so bright as we could
wish, yet they are far from entirely dis-
heartening and by no means preclude
gradual and progressive improvement in
human society which, before the late wild
speculations on the subject, was the object
of rational expectations. (Malthus, 1992
pp. 330-31.)
Unfortunately, the Malthus of the first edition
provided a model of population growth that
accurately depicted the experience of nearly all
of human history and was generally valid up to
the time he wrote. But he was also correct in his
view that during the century following the pub-
lication of the essay that there would be gradual
improvement in the well-being of people in the
part of the world where he lived, namely Eu-
rope. However, the progress was neither uni-
form nor without interruption, as witness the
Irish famine of the 1840's and other famines
and food shortages that occurred in several Eu-
ropean countries during the nineteenth century.
In the second edition he recognized a third
factor that affected population growth in addi-
tion to vice and misery-namely, the desire for
self-improvement. In other words, families
were willing and capable of influencing the
number of children by changing the age of
marriage, for example.
What made it possible for the world to escape
from what could be called the Malthusian trap?
The answer is simple: the creation of knowl-
edge.1 While there had been improvements in
agriculture for many millennia through knowl-
edge gained from practical experience-learn-
ing by doing-there was an explosion of
knowledge over the past two centuries that
made possible an unparalleled increase in per
capita well-being, not just in terms of food but
in all aspects of life. Fundamentally, new tech-
nologies have been developed at a rate unprec-
edented by historical standards.
Consider the following (Angus Maddison,
1995):
1. The increase in the world's population in the
decade of the 1980's of 844 million was
nearly as large as the world's total popula-
tion in 1800 of 900 million.
2. During the decade of the 1980's the increase
in the world's gross domestic product per
capita equaled the estimated per capita gross
domestic product in 1820 (Maddison, 1995
p. 228).
Measured in 1990$, in the 1980's the per
capita GDP increased by $661; the per capita
figure for 1820 was $651.
3. The physical world-the land, the water, the
air, the sun-was basically the same in the
1980's as it was in 1820 or 1020 or 109000
years ago. Some might argue that the phys-
ical world was less valuable than in the past.
The magnitude of the increase in the world's
output since 1820 is much greater than is di-
rectly implied by the comparability of the in-
crease in GDP during the 1980's and in all
history up to 1820. The increase in real world
output during the 1980's was more than 10
times the output in 1820 and the world output in
1990 was 40 times that of 1820. How could
these enormous changes have occurred? They
occurred because we have found ways to offset
the limitations that natural resources imposed
on the world's output in times past as well as
improving greatly the amount and productivity
of human capital. We have not found how to
repeal the principle of diminishing marginal
returns. But we have found low cost and abun-
dant substitutes for natural resources important
in the production process.
As I will show later, the improvement in
well-being of the world's population goes far
beyond the enormous increase in the value of
the world's output. The improvements are evi-
dent in fewer famines, increased caloric intakes,
reduced child and infant mortality, increased
life expectancy, great reductions in time
worked, and greatly increased percentage of the
population that is literate.