These important insights into the
macro-economic policy implications of oil
prices fit into the broader efforts of economists
to disentangle the sources of the
current inflation and identify the appropriate
remedies. They differentiate among
(1) excess demand, which had spent
most of its force by early in 1974, (2) the
price-wage-price spiral, which began to
turn more rapidly in 1974, and (3) external-
shock or special-sector inflation, in
particular, the commodity-price surges
that permeate the present inflation and
account for its special character and
ferocity.

The first responds rather readily to
monetary-fiscal pressure, the second responds
more reluctantly, and the third is
highly resistant to the demand-management
measures of any given country. For
the second and especially the third types,
therefore, high costs in unemployment and
foregone output have to be incurred for
small gains in curbing inflation. So the distinction
is an instructive one for policyeven
when the instructions are ignored.
As we meet here tonight, the economic
lessons that were so long ignored are being
painfully driven home by severe recession
and unemployment coupled with continuing
inflation. A much-belated consensus
that fiscal and monetary stimulus can now
be undertaken with minimal inflationary
risk is rapidly forming.

The economists' three-ply classification
of inflation sources is also useful in driving
home another point: In most U.S. inflations,
consisting of the first two types, one
person's price is another person's income,
so that in spite of some reshuffling, there
is no net loss in real income. Not so in
1973-75. Commodity inflation has transferred
tens of billions of dollars of real income
out of the pockets of urban consumers
and wage earners into the hands of
farmers and foreigners where it is beyond
the reach of the collective bargaining
process. From this, several important
inferences can be drawn:

Point for point, this inflation cum
relative price changes is harsher in its
impact than previous postwar inflations.
In this "no-win" inflation, the wage
earner's loss has not generally been the
employer's gain; hence, if the wage
"catch-up" process succeeds in recouping
the full rise in the cost of living,
much of the wage increase will pass
through to prices and thereby give the
wage-price spiral another self-defeating
turn.

It follows, as various economists
urged throughout 1974, that tax cuts to
bolster the real income of labor, if put in
the context of a social contract, might
well relieve some of the pressure for
higher wages.

In this respect, today's situation contrasts
rather sharply with the 1950-51 inflation
when a similarly rapid run-up in world
commodity prices was accompanied by a
rapid rise in profit margins side-by-side
with vigorous federal policies to boost
capacity. The ensuing combination of
ebbing world market prices and wage increases
that could be granted without
generating higher product prices resulted
in a remarkable four-year period of price
stability from 1952 to 1956.
A closely allied economic insight goes to
the nature of the inflationary process. It