countries should sacrifice some of their
hopes for economic development in the interest
of slowing the climate change that
may prove disastrous. But the advice contains
a contradiction Any disaster to developing
countries from climate change will be
a disaster to their economic development.
What is desired is to optimize development
by investing in greenhouse-gas abatement
only when that appears, subject to all the
uncertainties, to contribute more to their
development in the future than the alternative
direct investment in development. It is
not economic growth versus environment; it
is growth with the environment taken into
account.
A related point: population growth is important
for the climate change, in two respects.
One is that carbon emissions in developing
countries are positively driven by
population; population growth does not
merely dilute carbon emissions per capita,
but for a number of reasons more people
means more carbon. If China succeeds in
holding population growth to near zero for
the next couple of generations, it may do as
much for the earth's atmosphere as would a
heroic Chinese anticarbon program coupled
with 2-percent annual population growth.
The other population effect is simply that
the most likely adverse impact of climate
change on human productivity and welfare
would be on food production. In the poorest
parts of the world, the adequacy of food
depends on the number of mouths and
stomachs. In a hundred years, adverse
changes in climate for food production
would be far more tragic if the countries we
now associate with the developing world
had populations totaling 12 billion than if
they totaled 9 billion. For the developing
world, the increasing concentration of people
is probably more serious than the increasing
concentration of carbon dioxide.
At this point, I appear to have reached
the conclusion that the developed world has
no self-interest in expensively curtailing carbon
consumption and that the developing
world cannot afford to incur economic
penalties to slow the greenhouse effect.
There is a mismatch between those who
may be vulnerable to climate change and
those who can afford to do anything about
it.
V
Why should the rich developed countries
care enough about climate change to do
anything about it? The answer must depend
partly on how expensive it is going to be to
do anything about it. Abatement programs
have been examined in a number of econometric
models that suggest we might want
to treat as pertinent the sacrifice of perhaps
2 percent of world GNP in perpetuity.
A strong argument for trying seriously to
slow climate change is that the developing
countries are vulnerable and we care. Developed
countries are currently providing
$50 billion per year of assistance to the
developing world; we would be talking about
expending or forgoing perhaps 4-8 times
that much to slow emissions and slow climate
change. Whether people in the developed
democracies could be mobilized to
contribute so much to benefit, half a century
from now, the people in the countries
we now call developing I do not know, but I
believe that if the developed countries were
prepared to invest, say, $200 billion per year
in greenhouse-gas abatement, explicitly for
the benefit of developing countries 50 years
or more from now, the developing countries
would clamor to receive the resources immediately
in support of their continued development.
There would undoubtedly be
abatement opportunities so cheap that they
could compete with direct aid to developing
countries, but it would be hard to make the
case that the countries we now perceive as
vulnerable would be better off 50 or 75
years from now if 10 or 20 trillions of dollars
had been invested in carbon abatement
rather than in their economic development.
A second argument for an expensive program
of carbon abatement is that, while our
production of material goods and services
may not suffer from climate change, our
natural environment may be severely damaged.
Natural ecosystems will be destroyed;
plant and animal species will become extinct.
Places of natural beauty will be degraded.
Valuable chemistries of plant and