In his Presidential Address five years ago,
Zvi Griliches ( 1994) called attention to the severe
difficulties that beset current attempts to
measure the growth of labor productivity in
the American economy. Because of these difficulties,
it is likely that the true rate of economic
growth is substantially underestimated.
The root of the problem is the difficulty in
measuring output in the service sector which
now represents two-thirds of the economy. In
such sectors as health care and information
services, the contribution to gross domestic
product (GDP) is measured by inputs rather
than outputs, a procedure that makes it impossible
to gauge accurately improvements in the
quality of output. Thus, in the case of computers,
which are transforming American society,
economists have been unable, so far, to
find a measurable contribution of computers to
the rise in labor productivity-an astonishing
paradox.
I want to follow up on this problem of mismeasurements.
My thesis is that the profession
is lagging behind the economy more than it
has to. We are, to some extent, entangled in
concepts of the economy and in analytical
techniques that were developed during the first
third or so of the century, when economics
emerged as a modem discipline. The range of
the discipline did not expand greatly during
the middle decades of the century, due partly
to a concentration on the reformulation of the
previous analytical concepts and techniques in
more sophisticated and more general mathematical
models. Although the dividends from
these efforts were high and have contributed
to the flexibility and capacity of economics,
they did not encourage a reconsideration of
some of the received assumptions about the
scope and focus of economic analysis. There
has been a significant broadening of the scope
of economics during recent decades, with the
emergence of such fields as the new household
economics, the new institutional economics,
the economics of aging, and medical economics,
but much remains to be done.
The balance of this address is divided into
four sections. I begin with the inadequate
attention to the accelerating rate of technological
change, the implications of this acceleration
for the restructuring of the economy,
and its transforming effect on human beings.
I then consider the neglect of the nonmarket
sector of the economy, the implication of that
neglect for the measurement of consumption,
and for the analysis of economic growth. The
third section deals with the need to shift the
focus of economic analysis from crosssectional
to life-cycle and intergenerational
data sets, especially in connection with forecasting.
The final section points to the impact
of cultural lag in the treatment of material inequality,
and the neglect of the more severe
problem of spiritual inequality. I use the word
spiritual not in its religious sense but as a reference
to commodities that lack material form.
Spiritual or immaterial commodities make up
most of consumption in the United States and
other rich countries today.