transplanted, cloned, arbitrarily altered in ex-
ternal appearance, artificially changed in per-
sonality and intelligence, and otherwise
manufactured in ways that challenge the defi-
nition of a human being (cf., Zbigniew Brze-
zinski, 1996).
It. The Growth of the Nonmarket Sector'
One aspect of technophysio evolution has
been a change in the structure of consumption
and in the division of discretionary time be-
tween work and leisure. Perhaps the best index
of the growth of the nonmarket sector is the
change in the use of time. Changes in hours of
work and in the average division of the day
have paralleled the changes in the structure of
consumption. Table 2 shows the remarkable
reduction in the workyear that has occurred for
males in the U.S. labor force over the past cen-
tury. Sleep, meals, and essential hygienie,
which are biologically determined, required
about 10 hours of the day in 1880, as they do
today. The remaining 14 hours represent "dis-
cretionary" time.
The most notable feature of Table 2 is the
large increase in leisure available to the typical
male worker. His leisure time has tripled over
the past century, as his workyear declined
from about 3,100 hours to about 1,730 hours
today. Table 2 also forecasts the division of
the average day in 2040, indicating that by that
date more than half of the discretionary day
will be devoted to leisure activities. The fore-
cast is for a reduction of the workyear from
the current average of about 1,730 hours to just
1,400 hours, with the average workweek down
to 30 hours.
The pattern of chainge anmong women was
similar to that among men (cf., Claudia
Goldin, 1990; Stanley Lebergott, 1993). Th'e
workday of wotnen in 1.880 was somnewhat
longer, and in some respects may have bexen
more arduous, than that of men. In households
of working farmners, artisans, and manual la-
borers, wives rose before their husbainds and
continued working until bedtimle at 10 or I1
P.M. That routine suggests a workday that

may have run about 15 niinutes longer than
that of males, implying an annual workyear of
perhaps 3,200 hours.
As a result of the mechanization of the
household, smaller families per household,
and the marketing of prepared foods, the typ-
ical nofiemployed mnarried woman today
spends about 3.4 hours per day engaged in
housework; and if she is enmployed the figure
for housework drops to 2.2 hours. However,
women in the labor force average about 4.4
hours per day as emnployees. Hence comlbining
"4work" with " chores," men and women
work roughly equal amounts per day, and both
enjoy much miore leisure than they used to.
The principal difference is that the gains of
women have comrie exclusively from the re-
duction in hours of housework, while the gains
of men have come from the reduction in the
hours of employed work (cf., John P.
Robinson and Geoffrey Godbey, 1997).
I have so far retained the common distinc-
tion between work and leisure, although these
terms are already inaccurate and may soon be
obsolete. The distinction was invented when
most people were eingaged in manual labor for
60 or 70 hours per week and was intended to
conitrast with the highly regarded activities of
the English gentry or their American equiva-
lent, Thorsten Veblen's (l1899) "leisure
class." However, it should not be assumed
that members of the leisure class were indo-
lent. In their youth they were students and ath-
letes. In young adult years they were warriors.
In middle and later ages they were judges,