DIAMOND: SOCIAL SECURITY
since the political process is not equivalent to a
consistent approach to policy over time (which,
it seems to me, is an essential property of democracy
given divergent preferences and
views), we must consider issues from multiple
perspectives.11
An education built around the Arrow-Debreu
model may lead to overvaluing the fundamental
welfare theorem. The wonderful properties of
competitive equilibrium in certain unrealistic
circumstances lead the profession to be very
aware of distortions that prevent first-best outcomes.
But some distortions are associated with
redistribution and with easing other deviations
from first-best rules. Stressing the distortions
caused by government policies and not giving
equal weight to the redistribution and insurance
and revenue generation accomplished by these
policies, effectively doing partial first-best
thinking rather than complete second-best
thinking, can lead to unbalanced inferences
about policies.12
II. Annuitization
Some mandate for retirement saving is not
particularly controversial among policy-oriented
economists, so I begin with mandatory annuitization.
First, let us consider the point of payments
that are conditional on being alive. With
some saving for retirement (over and above
precautionary balances) a worker can learn of
rates of return (and risks) available in the market
for investing for different lengths of time
(that is, including an illiquidity premium). Anyone
investing for some period of time (for example,
bank certificates of deposit, insurance
contracts, mutual funds with an early withdrawal
penalty, direct loans) could wonder how
much more might be paid if the investor were
still alive provided there was no payment at all
if the investor were no longer alive. With a
what a model is all about. On this subject, see Alfred
Marshall (1948, p. 366).
11 That is, thinking only in terms of lifetime utilities and
sustained government policy rules seems to me inadequate.
12 For example, when Congress removed the retirement
test between the age of full benefits and age 70, some
wanted to remove the test for all those over age 62. Noting
only that the test discourages work, without noting its ef-
fects on the timing and size of benefit receipt would be an
example of such partial first-best thinking.
noticeable probability of the investor's dying
before reaching the end of the contract period
and little cost for checking whether the investor
is still alive, it would be worthwhile for a borrower
(bank, insurance company, mutual fund,
or direct borrower) to offer some additional
payment in return for being freed from payment
in the event of the death of the investor.
This is the essence of an annuity and the
essence of why for an investor with no interest
in bequests and a tolerance for some illiquidity,
an annuitized asset dominates the same asset
without an annuity feature. This is how the
Arrow-Debreu model works when markets are
complete-the gain from annuitization can be
thought of as a lowering of the price of future
consumption by forgoing deliveries after one's
death. The formal argument for the dominance
of annuitization was made by Menahem Yaari
(1965) in the context of a conventional annuity
that guarantees payments over the rest of one's
life. But the argument is much broader than that
(Thomas Davidoff et al., 2003). Moreover, simulations
show a sizable quantitative importance
of annuity opportunities.
People do care about their children. But, a
bequest motive does not eliminate the advantage
of some annuitization. With a bequest motive
and complete Arrow-Debreu markets, one
would determine how much of one's lifetime
budget constraint to give away and when to give
it (e.g., when children reach some age). It would
seem very odd to prefer to have one's children
receive an amount in present value that was
conditional on how long one lived (even if one
did not want to make a transfer before dying).
So, one would still use annuities, the purchase
of commodities conditional on being alive, for
all of one's own planned consumption. That is,
having a bequest motive is not a basis for doing
no annuitization in a complete market settingunless
one was roughly risk neutral about both
the amount of bequest and its timing. Without
complete markets, a willingness to invest in
illiquid assets for future consumption leads to
the same advantage for some annuitization.
13 This is the way a defined benefit system works for
workers without any dependents eligible for benefits. The
risk could be shifted from the borrower to the set of investors
by distributing a fraction of the amount not paid to
deceased investors to surviving investors. This is the way
that CREF annuities work.
VOL. 94 NO. 1
5