It was stipulated that a low-cost producer or
producers were already in operation abroad;
then, the argument proceeded, a potential entrant
in a developing country would be faced
with an initial period of high costs, but could
in the longer run compete. However, in the
presence of dynamic externalities (presumably
internal to the industry), it was believed
that no individual producer would find it profitable
to start production. In these circumstances,
the infant industry argument could
justify temporary intervention to make entry
into the new industry privately profitable provided
that, over the longer term, its costs
would decline below the imported cost by
enough to yield an economic return on the intervening
loss, which could be viewed as an
investment.
Although the infant industry argument was,
in a first-best world, an argument for a production
subsidy (which would presumably
equal the unit value of the externality and
might apply as well for production for exports
as for the domestic market), it was combined
with the appeal for import substitution14 to
yield a justification for protection of newly established
manufacturing industries in developing
countries.
However, combining the assumptions that
industrialization would have to take place
through substituting for imports, that there
were infant industries requiring initial intervention,
and that export earnings were unlikely
to increase, the stage was set for trade
and industrialization policies.
The premises underlying import-substitution
policies were so widely accepted that developing
country exceptions were even incorporated
into the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) articles. Article XVIII
explicitly protected the developing countries
from the "obligations" of industrialized countries
and permitted them to adopt tariffs and
quantitative restrictions. They also were entitled
to "special and differential treatment" in
other regards under GATT. That the GATT,
the upholder of an open international trading
system, would accept an "exception" for
developing countries shows how deeply entrenched
the views supporting import substitution
were. It is arguable that the very
existence of this exception not only legitimized
developing countries' inner-oriented
trade policies, but also removed pressures
that might otherwise have been brought to
bear earlier for them to adopt trade and payments
regimes more conducive to economic
growth. "
D. Resulting Evolution of Policies
In one way or another, provision was made
in country after country that, once domestic
production became feasible, imports would be
restricted. In Brazil, a "Law of Similars" provided
that firms importing goods that were
similar to those available domestically would
lose their government privileges, which included
not only access to credit and tax treatment,
but also eligibility to bid on government
contracts and a variety of other valuable rights.
In India, imports were licensed, and in the
event that there was domestic production, any
would-be importer was required to obtain letters
from any supplier government officials
thought might be capable of producing the
good to the effect that the supplier could not
meet the specifications. In Turkey, goods were
removed from the list of items for which import
licenses could be granted once domestic
production capacity was available. Similar
provisions, or very high tariffs, were used to
encourage import substitution in most developing
countries."
and critically scrutinizes the various circumstances in
which those conditions might hold. Baldwin's article was
an important contribution to better understanding of the
empirical relevance of the theory, as I shall argue below.
'4 It was also believed that there was a revenue constraint,
making the first-best production subsidy infeasible.
More recent analyses would also point to the greater potential
for corruption inherent in production subsidies as
yet another reason why protection might be preferable.  '" See Kenneth Dam (1970 Ch. 14) for a full discussion.  16 In Argentina, an effort was made to liberalize the
trade regime by lowering tariffs in the late 1970's. To the
surprise of officials, there was no apparent effect of the
first round of tariff cuts. Subsequent investigation revealed
that the tariffs in question had been between 500 and 1,000
percent, and that they had been above the rates at which
domestic producers could compete.