And the discontinuous penalties correspond to
the losses of utility due to respective deviations
from that norm. In particular, Shefrin and Tha-
ler assumed that there is no such cost at all if
consumption comes only from current income.  That means that current income can be consid-
ered as consumers' entitlement to spend, since
any consumption that is less than current in-  come entails no deviation at all from the norm
regarding the account that should finance it.
* Shefrin and Thaler give an impressive array
of econometric facts in support of their
model. Insofar as these facts support their
mental accounting model, they also equally
well support its reinterpretation-with the  norm that current income is an entitlement to
spend. Those facts include: differential sav-
ings out of windfall and current income;52 a
less than one-to-one displacement of discre-
tionary saving by employee pension contri-
butions;53 undersaving for retirement;54 and a
marginal propensity to consume out of fully
anticipated bonuses that is much greater than
the marginal propensity to consume out of
monthly income.55
* Retired people are commonly believed to
tailor their consumption to a concept of
income rather than to the value of their
assets. Shefrin and Statman (1984) have
viewed this as another form of mental ac-
counting. They also present considerable
evidence regarding such behavior.
C. Summary
Considerable evidence suggests that people's
views regarding what they are entitled to spend
play a major role in their consumption choices.
It also suggests strongly that current income
plays a special role in those entitlements. She-
frin and Thaler have explained such patterns by
mental accounting. A reinterpretation of their
model shows that they also could have ex-
plained this behavior in terms of norms. Once  again we see that the current versions of the
life-cycle hypothesis have left out missing mo-
tivation that easily justifies the excess sensitiv-
ity of consumption to income in Keynes's
psychological law.
VI. Investment and Cash Flow
The debate concerning investment has been
surprisingly close to the debate about consump-
tion. The early Keynesians emphasized two  variables as determinants of investment: current
cash flow (with profits as a major component),
and the firm's current holdings of liquid assets.
Each of these variables is a measure of funds
available to firms for investment without seek-
ing outside finance.56 In contrast, the later liter-
ature denied any special role of liquidity in the  investment function.
The first such questioning came from
Modigliani and Miller, who assumed that man-
agers maximize shareholder value and that mar-
kets are frictionless and competitive. In this
case, a firm's financial position plays no role in
the value of the firm. The argument for this
independence proceeds as follows. By construc-
tion, Modigliani and Miller show how a com-
petitive equilibrium changes if a firm increases
its debt and buys back shares. In the new equi-
librium, investment will be unchanged, and
shareholders will offset the increase in the
firm's debt by a compensating increase in the
bonds in their respective private portfolios. The
reason the equilibrium changes in this way is
straightforward: if the markets for debt cleared
in the old equilibrium, they will again clear in
the new. If managers' choice of investment
maximized shareholder value in the old equilib-
rium, the same choice of investment maximizes
it in the new. Investment is therefore indepen-
dent of the firm's current financial position,
including its current liquidity position and its  current cash flow.
The advent of q-theory similarly questioned a
special place for current variables, such as cash
flow and liquid asset holdings in the investment
decision. In the original version of the theory,
James Tobin (1969) suggested that a firm's op-
timal investment strategy arbitrages between