Reports of the demise of our discipline are
grossly exaggerated.

IV. The "Outputs" of Public Economics
Having considered some indicators of
the quality of our inputs and of the revealed
preferences for our outputs, let me
continue this exercise in casual (andcongenial)
empiricism by taking an unscientific
but not unrepresentative sample of
the outputs of economics, especially those
bearing on policy. For this purpose, I
draw on my chosen field of public finance,
or public economics, to illustrate the telling
conceptual and empirical advances of
economics in recent decades and the resulting
enrichment of its offerings to the policy
maker. Indeed; such an appraisal offers so
many healthy antidotes to "what's wrong
with economics" that I was tempted to
devote my whole discourse to it tonight.
But I resisted the temptation because,
first, much of it has already been done in
carefully documented depth in survey
volumes by Brookings and the National
Bureau;2 second, I figured it might test
your patience and mine; and third, it
would have left no room for a confrontation
with inflation. So I offer instead a
miniaturized assessment of the achievements
of public economics as viewed
through the policy prism.
Public Expenditures

Consider first the striking contributions
economics has made in the past generation
to clear thinking and better informed
decisions on public expenditures. Partly,
this reflects advances in economic science,
for example, in the theory of public goods
and human capital, and partly, creative
new applications of the economist's characteristic
way of looking at problems of
choice, namely, through the lens of opportunity
costs, benefits, and alternative
paths to a stated goal.

Economics can offer much more concrete
guidance on efficient ways of allocating
resources to achieve stated governmental
objectives than it can on what the
public-private sector division of resources
should be. That may be a good thing in
that presidents and congressmen view the
fixing of goals for public health, housing,
welfare, and the like as what they were
elected for, yet at the same time seek, or
at least accept, economic guidance on the
choice among competing methods of
achieving these goals.

Nonetheless, rapid progress in the
theory of public goods since the appearance
of the Samuelson classic on "The
Pure Theory of Public Expenditures" just
twenty years ago has vastly improved on
the simplistic theory it replaced. It has
facilitated straight thinking on the derivation
of conditions for efficient public-sector
allocations from private evaluations and
on the articulation of social priorities
through the political process.
Interwoven with the newer thinking
about public goods has been a resurgent
interest in externalities or spillover effects.
In a sense, the pure collective good is a
case of total externality-all of its benefits
are external and nonmarketable since
nobody can be excluded from them. That
may clarify thinking but gives little policy
guidance.

Yet, the externality concept translates
into hard-headed policy advice in such
disparate areas as pollution, federal aid,
and the law. When pollution became a
national concern, economists quickly drew
on their tool kit to develop proposals for
antipollution taxes (within the context of
2 See Alan Blinder and Robert Solow et al. This is the
capstone volume of the Brookings Studies on Govern-
ment Finance, directed by Joseph A. Pechman, which
has produced 35 books in the past decade. See also Carl
Shoup et al. This was one of several survey volumes un-
der the general heading, Economic Researchl: Retrospect
and Prospect, based on the Bureau's Fiftieth Anniversary
Colloquia.
