Global warming from carbon dioxide was
an esoteric topic 15 years ago, unknown to
most of us. But in a few years, helped along
by some hot summers, it has climbed to the
top of the international agenda. Cabinets,
Parliaments, and heads of government have
issued pronouncements on reducing carbon
emissions, and in June of this year more
than a hundred governments will be represented
by ministers or heads of government
at a great United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development to be held
in Rio de Janeiro. Together with nongovernmental
organizations representing labor,
business, students, environmentalists,
scientists, and groups concerned with health
and child development and family planning,
these representatives are expected to need
25,000 hotel rooms. A "framework agreement"
is widely expected, together with
some institutional arrangements that will
keep global environmental issues permanently
on every government's agenda. And
at the center of these issues will be the
phenomenon that has come to be known as
the "greenhouse effect."
The greenhouse effect itself is simple
enough to understand and is not in any real
dispute. What is in dispute is its magnitude
over the coming century, its translation into
changes in climates around the globe, and
the impacts of those climate changes on
human welfare and the natural environment.
These are beyond the professional
understanding of any single person. The
sciences involved are too numerous and diverse.
Demography, economics, biology, and
the technology sciences are needed to project
emissions; atmospheric chemistry,
oceanography, biology, and meteorology are
needed to translate emissions into climates;
biology, agronomy, health sciences, economics,
sociology, and glaciology are needed
to identify and assess impacts on human
societies and natural ecosystems. And those
are not all.
There are expert judgments on large
pieces of the subject, but no single person
clothed in this panoply of disciplines has
shown up or is likely to. So, I venture to
offer my judgment.
First on the principle. The metaphor of
the greenhouse is not quite appropriate, but
the basic idea is not in dispute. The earth is
bathed in sunlight, some reflected and some
absorbed. If the absorption is not matched
by radiation back into space, the earth gets
warmer until the intensity of that thermal
radiation matches the absorbed incoming
sunlight. Some gases in the atmosphere that
are transparent to sunlight absorb radiation
in the infrared spectrum, blocking that outward
radiation and warming the atmosphere.
When the atmosphere has warmed
enough to intensify the thermal radiation so
that it matches the absorbed incoming sunlight,
equilibrium is achieved at the higher
temperature. These so-called "greenhouse"
gases can be identified in the laboratory.
Carbon dioxide is one of them; methane is
another, as is nitrous oxide, as are the chlorofluorocarbons
(CFC's).
The principle has been in practice for
decades. On a clear day in January, the
earth and its adjacent air in Orange County
California warm nicely, but the warmth radiates
rapidly away during the clear nights,
and frost may threaten the trees. Smudge
pots, burning cheap oil on a windless night,
produce substances, mainly carbon dioxide,
that absorb the radiation and protect the
trees with a blanket of warm air. Greenhouses,
in contrast, mainly trap the air
warmed by the earth's surface and keep it