new methods. Their weight is substantial,
but for a given rate of technological prog-
ress these costs are unlikely to change
much in relation to private GNP. Hence
allowances for these costs reduce not
merely the rates of return but also their
downtrend.
It is easy to become misled into the
belief that the method of the Residual
automatically implies proper recognition
of obsolescence. In a sense it does recognize
obsolescence but it does not do so in the
sense relevant to our problem. The method
is not intended to, and it does not, take
account of the fact that in any of the "base
periods" with which the "present period"
is compared, the now old technology was
new.36 Hence at that time the now old
technology gave rise to obsolescence and
it required various instrumental activities
that represented costs of changing over to
new methods. These costs would not have
been incurred in the base-period and they
would not be incurred now if there had
been no technological advance in either
period. In a continuously progressing
economy the inputs used for the obsoles-
cence-component of capital-replacement
are continuously withheld from the pro-
duction of consumer goods or from net
investment (or from the public-sector
counterparts of these). 37
A list of the items that may be regarded
as unrecorded costs is presented in Appen-
dix C, along with explanations. In spite
of the large number of items on the list,
we may take it for granted that only one
item-conventional obsolescence-corre-
sponds individually to an appreciable pro-
portion of private GNP. As for the other
items, in some cases it is doubtful whether
they have a legitimate place on the list and
at any rate, even their joint weight cannot
be appreciable when expressed in relation
to private GNP. Among the items listed
in Appendix C there are only a few that
would be suspect, even at first sight, of
possessing large weight. Item 5 of the
Appendix-the cessation of learning-by-
doing with the old equipment and for the
old product when new methods are intro-
duced-belongs among the suspects, but
in reality it is unlikely to be of great quan-
titative importance because in each period
the discarded methods are apt to be those
for which learning-by-doing has largely
run its course. Item 6-the technical im-
perfections of recording-must have been
large in the early decades, but we are con-
cerned here mainly with the post-1953
period, and our few references to pre-1953
periods were based on attempts to get
indirectly at what now would be "recorded"
R & D. For the present purpose I shall
assume that a deliberately high estimate is
obtained of the joint weight of the un-
recorded costs other than obsolescence in the
usual sense if these other costs are put
at 2 percent in relation to private GNP;
and that a deliberately low estimate is
obtained by putting these items at 1 per-
cent.
What mainly matters is obsolescence in
the usual sense. The fact that we consider a
component of capital consumption a cost
even though we are moving in a GNP
framework may seem paradoxical, but for
no good reason, because while for our
periods GNP may safely be used as a
proxy for NNP, we must take into account
that if capital consumption had all along
been smaller, then any given GNP would
have been a proxy for a higher NNP.
Experts have repeatedly expressed the
view that practically all of the capital
consumption and replacement, which cor-