from predators, and reproducing. In common
with other animals, they evolved a sense of
personal space sufficient to provide some defense
against attack, and a system of trust and
reputation that allowed them to suspend their
"fight or flee" defenses and live together with
family members. These spatial social interactions
had a physiological basis-reward pathways
in the brain and neurotransmitters that
facilitated social contact, reciprocity, and mutual
aid. Some of these apes discovered that
through division of labor, specialization, and
trade, they could be more productive and fertile,
and live better and longer. But trade, particularly
outside the family group, was risky business.
To get close enough to a stranger to trade
flints for furs, one had to risk being attacked.
The most successful apes dealt with this by
developing the ability to form bonds of trust
over larger social groups than the family. This
was accomplished by adapting the brain's visceral
reward pathways that already allowed
family units to function. Second, these apes
developed analytic, social, and communication
skills that allowed them to operate in larger
social and economic groups. These were cerebral
activities, and evolution selected species
with more cerebral capacity. Among these apes
were our ancestors. They gave us large brains,
with the capacity to explore the corners of our
universe, and to engage in sophisticated economic
activities. They also gave us an emotional
reward system that processes economic
actions in much the same visceral way that it
processes personal interactions: when to approach
and when to avoid, whom to trust, and
when to form personal or professional bonds.
The evolutionary tale I have just told is speculation,
based on observations of contemporary
apes and other animals, and fossil records.
However, the role of trust and reward pathways
in the brain, and how they affect economic
conduct, is something that we can investigate
experimentally, using the tools of brain science
and the new discipline of neuroeconomics to
study the processing of economic choice problems
at a physiological level. Brain measurements
include maps of energy consumption,
observed under experimental treatments that alter
electrochemistry and cognitive task. These
measurements fall short of Edgeworth's wistful  call in 1881 for a hedinometer to record pleasure,
but they provide some insight into the
sensations that economists call utility.
The early biologists observed that as the human
embryo developed, it seemed to go through
stages of evolution, from a simple one-celled
creature to its complex final form. That view
was superficial, but it does seem to be the case
that human physiology, and in particular the
structure of the brain, is consistent with a layering
of added functionality over a simpler and
more primitive core. The aspects of brain function
that we identify with being human-language,
the cognitive processes of deduction and
induction, the ability to empathize and interact
with others-are primarily sited in the frontal
lobe of the cerebrum, the outer layer of the brain
whose relative size and complexity in humans
differentiate us from most other species. The
more primitive limbic system, buried at the base
of the cerebrum, is heavily involved in emotion
and the reward pathways associated with sensations
of pain and pleasure. The limbic system
is active in animal behavior at a visceral level:
approach and avoidance, foraging, territory, and
reproduction. The electrochemistry of the limbic
system is similar in all animals, and on
the evolutionary scale clearly predates human
development.
Most people think of economic activity as
quite cerebral, learned through lengthy education
and shaped by culture. If the brain is the
hardware, then the utilitarian calculus might be
pictured as software, an operating system that is
stored and run at various, possibly relocatable,
hardware sites, and is modified, Linux-like, by
experience and selection. In this view, monitoring
the brain can tell you something about the
burden the software places on the hardware, but
relatively little about what the software is doing.
The picture that is now emerging, however, is
that economic behavior, like the brain itself, has
layers. Working a spreadsheet to balance a retirement
portfolio is indeed a high-level, learned
skill. Economic trading, however, also seems to
involve relatively primitive circuits in the limbic
system. Therefore, you should not be surprised
to learn that brain hardware is associated
with economic decisions in a substantial and
relatively direct way. Specifically, the limbic
system and its reward pathways qualify as the