size of industry output increases. This is
shown in Figure 2 which is a standard dia-
gram giving the firm's and the industry's AC
curves when the former is U shaped. As a
result, the deviations between average cost
and marginal cost will decline as industry
output increases and so the minimum size of
the entry cost required to preserve equi-
librium declines correspondingly.
However, here I want to describe another
approach offered in our book to the problem
of existence which I have just described- the
difficulty of satisfying simultaneously the
zero-profit requirement and the requirement
of marginal cost pricing. This second avenue
relies on the apparently unanimous conclu-
sion of empirical investigators of the cost
function of the firm, that AC curves are not,
in fact, characterized by a unique minimum
point as they would be if they had a smooth
U shape. Rather, these investigators tell us,
the A C curve of reality has a flat bottom -an
interval along which it is horizontal. That is,
average costs do tend to fall at first with size
of output, then they reach a minimum and
continue at that level for some range of
outputs, after which they may begin to rise
once more. An A C curve of this variety is
shown in Figure 3. Obviously, such a flat
segment of the A C curves does help matters
because there is now a range of outputs over
which MC pricing yields zero profits. More-
over, the longer the flat-bottomed segment
the better matters are for existence of equi-
librium. Indeed, it is easy to show that if the
left-hand end of the flat segment occurs at
output y' and the right-hand end occurs at
kym, then if k is greater than or equal to 2 the
existence problem disappears altogether, be-
cause the industry's AC curves will be hori-
zontal for any output greater than Ym, That

is, in any contestable market in which two or
more firms operate the industry AC curve
will be horizontal and MC pricing will al-
ways yield zero profits. To confirm that this
is so, note that if, for example, the flat
segment for the firm extends from y = 1,000
to y 2,000, then any industry output of,
say, 9,000 + Ay where 0< A y < 9,000 can be
produced by nine firms, each of them turn-
ing out more than 1,000 but less than 2,000
units. Hence, each of them will operate along
the horizontal portion of its AC curve, as
equilibrium requires.
Thus, if the horizontal interval (yi, kym)
happens to satisfy k , 2, there is no longer
any problem for existence of equilibrium in a
contestable market with two or more firms.
But fate may not always be so kind. What if
that horizontal interval is quite short, that is,
k is quite close to unity? Such a case is
shown in our diagram where for illustration I
have taken k =4/3.
I should like to take advantage of your
patience by dealing here not with the sim-
plest case-that of the single product in-
dustry-but with the multiproduct problem.
I do this partly to offer you some feeling of
the way in which the multiproduct analysis,
which is one of the hallmarks of our study,
works out in practice.
Because, as we have seen, there is no way
one can measure average cost for all output
combinations in the multiproduct case, I will
deal exclusively with the total cost function.
Figure 4 shows such a total cost function for
the single firm, which is taken to manufac-
ture two products, boots and shoes.
Let us pause briefly to examine its shape.
Along any ray such as OR, which keeps