kinds as long as these have enough in
common with the models discussed in
Appendix A. For us the essential property
of these constructs is that they are models
of disembodied progress in which the
elasticities of output with respect to the
inputs are reasonably well approximated
by the distributive shares of the inputs,
and in which distributive shares remain
reasonably stable. To the extent that these
assumptions are unrealistic our analysis
needs to be adjusted, and in Section III, I
have already pointed out that one type of
adjustment does not change the conclusions
very much. What should we think of
the "disembodiment" implication of our
framework, i.e., of the implication that
progress leads inter alia to the production
of new types of goods rather than depends
on new equipment?
Models of so-called embodied progress do
not seem convincing to me on logical
grounds, and to my knowledge, no claim of
empirical superiority has been made, let
alone established, for these frameworks. As
I said, all progress is necessarily disembodied
in the sense that new ideas must
always be put into effect with reliance on
the initially given resources. This is an
essential constraint under which all economies
operate. Improved production with
the initially given resources then leads to
more and better capital goods-hence to
the replacement of old with superior equipment
and structures ("obsolescence")-
and it yields more and better consumer
goods. But all this represents forward, not
backward, embodiment.
For various purposes it has proved rewarding
to interpret progress as "factoraugmenting"
; yet even if progress is interpreted
as purely capital-augmenting, this
alone does not change the framework into
one of embodied progress. Using a framework
in which some input is "augmented"
merely means expressing the productivityincrease
of that input as the equivalent of a
specific quantity-increase and expressing
the productivity-increases of other inputs
as resulting from complementarity. No
empirical superiority has been claimed for
this degree of unilateral emphasis on
capital-i.e., for assuming pure capitalaugmentation-
but at any rate more is
needed for obtaining "embodiment," in a
distinctive sense of the term.
If the embodiment hypothesis is not to
lose what I consider its essential characteristic,
the additional assumption must be
made that each period's capital-goods
output can become subject merely to a
single dose of augmentation which describes
a specific level of technology; and
that only the next period's capital goodsthe
next vintage-can become subject to
the next dose. This, I submit, is an unconvincing
assumption if we take into
account why next period's capital goodsnext
period's equipment-models-are superior
to this period's equipment-models.
They are superior because this period's
initially given equipment-models and labor
perform better than how these inputs
would have performed without the new
ideas. So why should the possibilities with
a period's capital goods-a given vintage
become exhausted during a specific period
for which a specific level of technological
knowledge is defined? If the possibilities do
not become exhausted in this fashion, then
a level of technological knowledge ceases
to be uniquely described by (or embodied
into) a specific vintage of capital goods.
In the absence of strong empirical support
for the hypothesis of pure capitalaugmentation
and of the required additional
assumption, I have fewer misgivings
about disembodiment than about embodiment.
Yet while so-called embodiment
makes too much of the role of new physical
capital formation in bringing about progress,
disembodiment implies overlooking
its progress-promoting effect which probably
does exist. The existence of this effect