experience, a changing world economy, and
research, there is no question of "going back"
to the earlier thinking and understanding of the
process.
A number of interesting questions arise
about this change in thought and policy.
How could it happen that a profession, for
which the principle of comparative advan-
tage was one of its key tenets, embraced such
protectionist policies? What was the contri-
bution of economic research to the sea
change in thinking, policy prescriptions, and
politicians' acceptance of the need for policy
reform? What sorts of economic research
best informed the policy process? In a nut-
shell, how did we learn? And what was the
contribution of economists and their re-
search to the process?
Attempting to answer these questions is
the subject of this lecture. Even with a focus
limited to trade and development, analysis of
the role of research and its usefulness is at
least somewhat conjectural. The issue, how-
ever, of what types of research inform good
policy is an important one. I suspect that the
tentative conclusions I draw here may be rel-
evant for other areas of research-informing
policy, but leave that to others to demon-
strate or refute.3
In what follows, I first sketch the initial ap-
proach to trade policy in early development
research and thought. Next, consideration is
given to the evolution of thought, research,
and experience with respect to trade and de-
velopment over the next several decades, and
to the "conventional wisdom" of the 1990's.
Thereafter, I consider the role of research and
the sorts of research that proved most fruitful
in guiding policy and changing the consensus.
Before proceeding, two caveats are neces-
sary. First, it is very difficult to disentangle
views of the proper role for trade policy in
development from views about the appropriate
role for the state. Partly as a legacy of the
Great Depression, partly because of the belief
that the Soviet Union had succeeded in its de-
velopmental and industrial aspirations through
central planning, and partly because of the per-
ceived success of wartime controls, there was
widespread agreement- in developed and de-
veloping countries alike-that the state should
play a major role in economic activity, not
only in affecting aggregate demand, but also
in regulating private markets and indeed aug-
menting or supplanting them with state-owned
enterprise production of manufactured and
other goods. Quite clearly, early views about
the necessity for a leading role for the state in
guiding resource allocation were incompatible
with an open trade policy or outer-oriented
trade strategy. Yet to attempt to consider the
evolution of both views is well beyond the
scope of this paper, and focus here is confined
to trade policy.
Second, to focus on research that influenced
thinking about economic policy is not to deni-
grate the importance of research that does not
appear to have had immediate policy relevance.
First of all, basic research often informs more
applied research. Second, in some cases of re-
search that provided little of lasting value, that
outcome could not be known at the time. Per-
haps some of that research served to demonstrate
the infeasibility of certain policy paths,4 or to
demonstrate the futility of further explorations.
Nonetheless, ex post it is clear that some
lines of research served to hasten the day
when policy makers would accept the desir-
ability of removing high walls of protection,
while others were irrelevant or served largely
to reinforce prejudices and perpetuate the "old
wisdom." Perhaps that is inevitable in the
"marketplace of ideas" as new paradigms are
brought forth to replace old ones.