Conceptual advances have continued
throughout the past twenty-five years, but
they have been more in the nature of a
fleshing out and consolidation of the original
breakthroughs with the aid of the
powerful tools of mathematics and econometrics.
Multiplier analysis, for example,
has moved from the theoretical realm into
large computer models of the economywith
the tax cut of 1964 and the surtax of
1968 providing empirical grist for the mill.
While the models differ on the exact value
of the multiplier, "a fiscal policy planner
will not often be led astray if he uses a
multiplier of 2" for government spending
(see Blinder and Solow).

Coupled with multiplier studies is the
even more subtle study of the structure
of the "outside lags," of the timing of responses
in the economy to changes in
fiscal policy. Though the empirical efforts
and debates go on apace, the behavior of
the cumulative multipliers in a clutch of
economic models suggests that for any
given change in fiscal policy, "at least 75
percent, probably much more, of the ultimate
effect is felt within the first year
after the initiation of the policy" (Blinder
and Solow). Although intractable questions
remain concerning investment responses
to fiscal policy changes, enough
has been learned about aggregate demand
responses to provide two broad generalizations
about fiscal policy:

One, the conditions for intelligent
fiscal policy are met if economic f orecasting
can answer two not-very-exacting
questions: Do projected economic
conditions in the ensuing six to nine
months call for restraint or stimulus?
Is the required dosage large or small?
Two, given the limited margin for
error in a high-employment economy,
it is better to rely on many smaller
monetary-fiscal moves than a few large
ones.

Implicit in these two generalizations is a
third one: Given both the internal shifts
and the external shocks with which stabilization
policy has to cope, a discretionary
policy that makes efficient use of feedback
information will be more effective than
an automatic policy that locks in on fixed
fiscal and monetary targets.
Development of a simplified measure of
fiscal impact revolving around the "full
employment surplus" (FES) concept is
another example of the typical process by
which economists expose error, develop approximations
of truth, but continue the
vigorous debate on further improvements.
First, policy makers had to be weaned
away from the annually balanced budget
and the cyclically balanced budget as
policy targets and from actual deficits or
surpluses (especially in budgets other than
the national income accounts budget) as
measures of budget stimulus or restriction.
It was not easy. It took almost a quarter
of a century before a Democratic president
was converted (in 1961) and another
decade to capture a Republican White
House.

But success on the policy frontier has
its own pitfalls, both political and economic.
What was intended as a measure of
policy was instead taken as a goal, namely,
a balanced budget at full employment,
a "self-fulfilling prophecy" as the Nixon
Administration called it. This erroneously
implied that the fiscal target should remain
fixed regardless of changes in monetary
policy and significant shifts in private
demand, for example, a plant-and-equipment
boom. Apart from trying to correct
such misconceptions, economists have had
to wrestle with the problem of the overstatement
of the full employment surplus
when inflation expands revenues faster
than expenditures, not to mention the
problem of weighting for differing multipliers
if tax or expenditure components
change sharply. In brief, the advances over