X. Concluding Comments
During the last two centuries, and especially
in the twentieth century, there has been an enormous
increase in knowledge that has been transformed
into technology and ways of utilizing
resources more efficiently. It is not only that
knowledge has increased rapidly but the means
of communicating that knowledge in an effective
way have been markedly improved and the
knowledge has become much more accessible
throughout the world.
The rapid growth of knowledge has resulted
both from the growth of the world's
population and the increase in the percentage
of that population that is now able to devote
time and energy to the creation of knowledge.
It was not so long ago that farmers accounted
for 80 percent of the world's labor force and
they barely produced enough for themselves
with little left for exchange. As productivity
in agriculture increased, the rapid growth of
cities occurred and the growth in real per
capita incomes exceeded what had ever been
achieved before. The fact that during the
1980's the increase in the world's output was
ten times what world output was in 1820
illustrates how great has been the growth of
output in a very brief period of time.
But perhaps the greatest achievement of the
twentieth century is that the majority of the
poor people of the world have shared in the
improvements in well-being made possible by
the advancement of knowledge. Three measures
show how great these improvements
have been-infant mortality rates, life expectancy,
and per capita food supplies. The large
cities of the developing world now have infant
mortality rates about a quarter of those of
New York City in 1890. True, there is much
more that can be done to share more fully the
benefits of the knowledge base. And I am
confident that whoever speaks from this platform
just 25 years from now could point to
further dramatic reductions in worldwide inequalities
in well-being.
pollution, do have an adverse effect on life expectancy, but
these effects are probably measured in months rather than
years. But those of us who live in high-income countries
often consider problems from the standpoint of our environment,
not the environment facing the majority of the
world's population. For example, with respect to air pollution,
the World Health Organization has estimated that in
the world in 1996 there were 2.7 million deaths from air
pollution (UNDP, 1998 p. 70). However, less than 7 percent
were in industrial countries. Of the 2.5 million deaths in
developing countries, almost 2.2 million deaths were attributed
to indoor air pollution, not to outdoor pollution, and
most were in rural areas. As real incomes in the developing
countries increase, leading to improvements in the quality
of housing and the replacement of indigenous fuels by
modem fuels, the adverse environmental effects of air pollution
will be significantly reduced.