some more limited field. I have long since ceased to be interested in the
theory of international trade; and I have long thought it naive to speak
of the theory of the business cycle. I strongly sympathize with Trevor
Swan, the Australian economist, in his recent review of Hicks' book."
Hicks begins his book in his characteristically disarming way, describing
it as a "progress report," with "weak links"; but it soon becomes
apparent that his hope is that this may be thte theory of the trade cycle,
the next stage (after the theorists have approved) being "the concern
of the statisticians, econometrists, and economic historians" to do the
detailed verifying. This is a not unfamiliar division of labor suggested
by the theorists. Swan, in concluding one of the best criticisms of the
book I have seen, says: "I suspect that the search for the theory of the
trade cycle . . . is the economist's equivalent of the search for the elixir
of life or the philosopher's stone." But "each hopeless effort adds its
quota of knowledge and understanding.'2 If the truth of the trade cycle
is many, policy directed against the trade cycle must reckon not with
one, but with all its theories. Is it not time . . . to forget the glittering
prize of achieving the theory of the trade cycle, and concentrate upon
the systematic and pedestrian attempt to discover how the economy
works and grows in its parts and as a whole?""3
We do not escape the limitations of the systematizing process when
we embark on theories of long-run growth and change, as Schumpeter
and Marx have done. This, however, does seem to me the kind of
theorizing we stand most in need of, and I regret that it would go far
beyond the limits of my paper to discuss it.
I come back then to the question with which I began my paper. Are
we, through our economic policies, making headway toward doing the
T. W. Swan, "Progress Report on the Trade Cycle," Econ. Record, Vol. XXVI (Dec.,
1950), pp. 186-200.
'2 I pause over this sentence. Possibly it is true, but in business-cycle theorizing so much
(lepends upon selection and emphasis that theories can even be misleading. Recognition of
such defects then induces some other theorist to present a counter-theory, and so the
game goes on endlessly. I have long preferred J. M. Clark's "strategic factors" approach,
based on the data rather than on any system of internal logic.
As the theories pile up one on another, we find ourselves forced to classify (and also
to sift and discard), to the point where this process of classification becomes itself a
form of business-cycle theorizing; the results are almost certain to have stamped upon  them the selection and emphasis which seem most acceptable to the classifier and interpreter.
Such work performs an invaluable service for the graduate students, whose success  in their doctoral examinations turns so much upon the compendiousness of their knowledge
of the literature. (I had wanted to say "conipendiosity," but cannot find it in the
dictionary.)  There is, at the opposite extreme, the all-inclusive type of business-cycle theory (for  which Swan nominates Kaldor's theory) into which almost any particular theory can be  fitted; but this sort of theory is apt to be so generalized as to be merely truistic.
13 Swan, loc. cit., p. 200.