Still, when I once heard George J. Stigler say that Malthus was the
most overrated of economists, I heard myself replying: "That's funny.
I think David Ricardo is the most overrated of economists." Probably
this conversation tells more about Stigler and me than about Ricardo
and Malthus. What I had in mind was this: Ricardo was a keen reasoner
and almost always comes out to be logical in the end, if you
accept his implicit and explicit definitions and assumptions. But he
makes unnecessarily rough weather of the matters he deals with, and
the reader is inclined to think him miraculous for being able to get
out of the holes he has dug for himself by his mode of attack and exposition.
Analytically, his theory of rent is excellent but not clearly
better than or earlier than the contemporaneous theories of rent of
Sir Edward West and Malthus. Ricardo did have a rigorously handled
general equilibrium model of primitive type; but its dynamics merely
elaborate on what is already in the population theory of Malthus and
Smith, and ought not today to be regarded as very "magnificent."
His greatest tour de force was the theory of comparative advantage;
and though it would be simply irrelevant to point out that Isaac Gervaise
had developed similar notions in the preceding century, one has
to take into account that Colonel Torrens, a mere mortal, had also
developed pretty much the same analysis at pretty much the same
time. Moreover, in most of the debates that Ricardo's work gave rise
to, the points of his critics were well taken, not so much in proving
that Ricardo's reasoning was wrong in terms of its assumptions, as in
pointing out that his conclusions were apt to be misunderstood and
were of limited significance. Instead of regarding it as a scandal that
so much ink has had to be split over Ricardo's flirtations and retreats
from a labor theory of value, his admirers think this makes him a seminal
thinker.5 In short, the notion of Keynes that "Ricardo's mind
was the greatest that ever addressed itself to economics" does not
agree with my assessment of his high I.Q. or creativeness in relation to
that of other economists.

Ricardo's name was certainly used as a rallying cry for the school
that favored freer trade in England. But Smith had already made the
needed points; if exaggeration is what was needed, Herbert Spencers
and Bastiats can usually be found who are unencumbered by the subtleties
of refined economic analysis. Moreover, detailed researchers will
more and more reveal that the Ricardian School provided the background
for early Victorian thinking but did not, in a detailed fashion