only by inflation. It can mnake the market rate higher than the natural
rate only by deflation. We have added only one wrinkle to Wicksellthe
Irving Fisher distinction between the nominal and the real rate of
interest. Let the monetary authority keep the nominal market rate for a
time below the natural rate by inflation. That in turn will raise the
nominal natural rate itself, once anticipations of inflation become widespread,
thus requiring still more rapid inflation to hold down the market
rate. Similarly, because of the Fisher effect, it will require not
merely deflation but more and more rapid deflation to hold the market
rate above the initial "natural" rate.
This analysis has its close counterpart in the employment market. At
any moment of time, there is some level of unemployment which has
the property that it is consistent with equilibrium in the structure of
real wage rates. At that level of unemployment, real wage rates are
tending on the average to rise at a "normal" secular rate, i.e., at a rate
that can be indefinitely maintained so long as capital formation, technological
improvements, etc., remain on their long-run trends. A lower
level of unemployment is an indication that there is an excess demand
for labor that will produce upward pressure on real wage rates. A
higher level of unemployment is an indication that there is an excess
supply of labor that will produce downward pressure on real wage
rates. The "natural rate of unemployment," in other words, is the level
that would be ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilibrium
equations, provided there is imbedded in them the actual structural
characteristics of the labor and commodity markets, including
market imperfections, stochastic variability in demands and supplies,
the cost of gathering information about job vacancies and labor availabilities,
the costs of mobility, and so on.'
You will recognize the close similarity between this statement and
the celebrated Phillips Curve. The similarity is not coincidental. Phillips'
analysis of the relation between unemployment and wage change is
deservedly celebrated as an important and original contribution. But,
unfortunately, it contains a basic defect-the failure to distinguish between
nominal wages and real wages-just as Wicksell's analysis failed
to distinguish between nominal interest rates and real interest rates.
Implicitly, Phillips wrote his article for a world in which everyone anticipated
that nominal prices would be stable and in which that anticipation
remained unshaken and immutable whatever happened to actual
prices and wages. Suppose, by contrast, that everyone anticipates that
prices will rise at a rate of more than 75 per cent a year-as, for exam-
3It is perhaps worth noting that this "natural" rate need not correspond to equality  between the number unemployed and the number of job vacancies. For any given structure  of the labor mnarket, there will be some equilibrium relation between these two magnitudes,  but there is no reason why it should be one of equality.