ther James against friend Harriet with John advancing two steps and go-
ing back one. It is ironical that evolutionary socialism in England and
elsewhere finds itself today backing up from its post-Benthamite in-
sisterice on nationalization of the means of production to something
like the society dimly envisaged by Mill. No wonder Karl Marx hated
Mill and denounced him as a vulgar bourgeois economist. Marx could
recognize the enemy when he saw him. (Curiously, the well-read Mill
either never heard of Marx or never thought him worth mentioning-
this despite Mill's interest in the Revolution of 1848, the Communist
Manifesto by Marx and Engels of that date, and Mill's survival be-
yond the 1867 date of Capital Vol. 1.)8
Karl Marx. From the viewpoint of pure economic theory, Karl Marx
can be regarded as a minor post-Ricardian. Unknowingly I once de-
lighted a southern university audience: my description of Marx as a
not uninteresting precursor (in Volume 2 of Capital) of Leontief's
input-output analysis of circular interdependence apparently had in-
furiated the local village Marxist. Also, a case can be made out that
Marx independently developed certain vague apprehensions of under-
consuinptionist arguments like those of the General Theory; but on
my report card no one earns too high a grade for such a performance,
since almost everyone who is born into this world alive experiences
at some time vague intimations that there is a hole somewhere in the
circular flow of purchasing power and production. This seems to come
on the same chromosome as the gene that makes people believe in
Say's Law; and Marx's bitter criticisms of Rodbertus for being an
underconsumptionist shows us that he is no exception.
As long as I am being big about admitting small merits in Marx, I
might mention a couple of technical suggestions he made about busi-
ness cycles that are not without some interest: Marx did formulate
a vague notion of 10-year replacement cycles in textile equipment as
the determinant of cyclical periodicity-which is an anticipation of
various modern "echo" theories. He also somewhere mentioned the
possibility of some kind of harmonic analysis of economic cycles by
mathematics, which with much charity can be construed as pointing
toward modern periodogram analysis and Yule-Frisch stochastic dy-
namics. A much more important insight involved the tying up of tech-
nological change and capital accumulation with business cycles, which
pointed ahead to the work of Tugan-Baranowsky (himself a Marxian),
Spiethoff, Schumpeter, Robertson, Cassel, Wicksell, and Hansen.
What can be gold in the field of fluctuations can be dirt in the con-
text of pure economic theory. Marx claimed in Volume 1 that there
was some interesting economics involved in a labor theory of value,