was on this subject,22 my comments will be brief. Throughout its
history, international trade has played a leading role in economic
growth and change. In modern times, it has been a process of growth
from a center in which the countries outside the center have owed their
development (and often their very existence) to the movement of
factors, as well as of goods, from the center; and the center countries
have in turn owed their further development primarily to this movement.
Such a world was inevitably heterogeneous, with countries in
markedly different stages of development. Any theory of international
trade which does not approach the subject matter in this way must
have very serious limitations as a guide to policy. Here particularly,
we should feel the inadequacies of static equilibrium analysis.
One of the greatest paradoxes of recent times is that, while since
1914 the world has been in a state of profound and virtually continuous
disturbance, formal international trade theory has continued to emphasize
equilibrating tendencies. This has been true even of non-Keynesian
theory, but even more true of the KeyneSian type of analysis of international
trade adjustment in terms of income. There has been, I think,
a tendency to run away from the actual problems by putting them
under an expansible umbrella labelled "short run" or ascribing them
to wars and periods of transition. The broad fact is that after nearly forty
years we find ourselves in a very different kind of world, with most
of the problems still remaining to be solved, and new ones continually
appearing.
Though I cannot sympathize with the tendency of theorists to throw
out everything that does not fit long-run theory under a general label
of "short run," I do feel that we have been troubled all along by two
basic problems, one of which is relatively short run and the other secular.
But the main point about them is that they are interrelated in the
sense that the former would probably not exist (or recur so persistently)
but for the latter. Since the end of the First World War, much has
been said about maldistribution of reserves. This was Keynes' complaint
in his Tract on Monetary Reform in 1923, when he said that
the world's gold was buried in the vaults of Washington. There has
been a persistent bias toward gold absorption by this country. Owing
in large part to this bias, it has not been possible either to restore the
gold standard or to work out any other feasible international system.
The International Monetary Fund has up to now been almost wholly
inoperative, and it remains to be seen how successful will be the much
more limited exDeriment of the European Payments Union set up
22J. H. Williams, "International Trade Theory and Policy-Some Current Issues," Proceedings
of the American Economic Association, Am. Econ. Rev., Vol. XLI, No. 2 (May,
1951), pp. 418-30.