statement of Ricardian rent theory will not stand up after a search
through Progress and Poverty for suitable quotations to put in an
anthology. While the single-tax movement is recognizable today as
being adverse to socialism, Henry George's attack on the inequality
of property ownership in land was influential in turning many people
toward socialism: thus Shaw tells us he became a socialist after hear-
ing Henry George speak in London.'"
Let us leave aside impact on the hoi polloi. What was Marshall's
influence over his long life on the educated man of affairs? For years
I looked for every trace I could find in books to show that someone
other than a professional economist or student had read Marshall.
I realize Marshall himself thought he was writing for the business-
man; but anyone who looks at the Principles will realize that no busi-
nessmen in good Queen Victoria's time or since would be likely to find
it attractive. (Actually Marshall's literary style is excellent, his graphs
are in footnotes, and his rather awkward mathematics is buried in
special notes at the end; but all this was to no avail.) I was able to
come up essentially with only two bits of evidence, one negative and
one positive. Pollock in his letters to Justice Holmes urged him to read
Marshall; Holmes, who was a man of the most catholic interests, re-
plied that he had tried it and it was not the dish for him. On the posi-
tive side, C.C.N.Y.'s great philosopher, Mlorris Cohen, reported some-
where that his inclination to be an eclectic in philosophy had received
inspiration from Alfred Marshall's eclecticism in economics.
To be sure, Marshall taught at a leading world institution where
half the English upper classes received their instruction. But actually
he taught at Cambridge little more than 20 years, not very much
longer say, than, I have taught at M.I.T. Sixty was a generous number
for those who attended his popular lectures, and that was the begin-
ning attendance not the final. As I know from personal conversations
with Alfred North Whitehead, Marshall's contemporaries at Cam-
bridge did not like him as a man ("He was a popish man who treated
Mary Marshall very badly." "A second class mind?"); and one gets