faster than national resources raises a second and not unrelated
puzzle. The income of the United States has been increasing at a much
higher rate than the combined amount of land, man-hours worked and
the stock of reproducible capital used to produce the income. Moreover,
the discrepancy between the two rates has become larger from
one business cycle to the next during recent decades [5]. To call this
discrepancy a measure of "resource productivity" gives a name to our
ignorance but does not dispel it. If we accept these estimates, the connections
between national resources and national income have become
loose and tenuous over time. Unless this discrepancy can be resolved,
received theory of production applied to inputs and outputs as currently
measured is a toy and not a tool for studying economic growth.
Two sets of forces probably account for the discrepancy, if we
neglect entirely the index number and aggregation problems that bedevil
all estimates of such global aggregates as total output and total
input. One is returns to scale; the second, the large improvements in
the quality of inputs that have occurred but have been omitted from
the input estimates. Our economy has undoubtedly been experiencing
increasing returns to scale at some points offset by decreasing returns
at others. If we can succeed in identifying and measuring the net gains,
they may turn out to have been substantial. The improvements in the
quality of inputs that have not been adequately allowed for are no
doubt partly in material (nonhuman) capital. My own conception,
however, is that both this defect and the omission of economies of
scale are minor sources of discrepancy between the rates of growth
of inputs and outputs compared to the improvements in human capacity
that have been omitted.
A small step takes us from these two puzzles raised by existing estimates
to a third which brings us to the heart of the matter, namely the
essentially unexplained large increase in real earnings of workers. Can
this be a windfall? Or a quasirent pending the adjustment in the supply
of labor? Or, a pure rent reflecting the fixed amount of labor? It seems
far more reasonable that it represents rather a return to the investment
that has been made in human beings. The observed growth in productivity
per unit of labor is simply a consequence of holding the unit
of labor constant over time although in fact this unit of labor has been
increasing as a result of a steadily growing amount of human capital
per worker. As I read our record, the human capital component has become
very large as a consequence of human investment.
Another aspect of the same basic question, which admits of the same
resolution, is the rapid postwar recovery of countries that had suffered
severe destruction of plant and equipment during the war. The toll
from bombing was all too visible in the factories laid flat, the railroad