the rationale of the new expanding economy, which had already
broken its mercantilist fetters, he did not produce a consistent theory
of value and distribution. This Ricardo did, writing forty years later.
And so it has come about that Ricardo is known, not only as the
greatest exponent of classical economics, but as the real founder of
the classical "system." By the time the theory had passed through the
hands of his followers, particularly J. S. Mill, it had indeed achieved
a triumph. By the middle of the nineteenth century, most economists,
at least in Britain, undoubtedly were convinced that the basic principles
of economics had been fully worked out, though doubtless much
work would always remain for lesser minds to do in the "applied
fields."
III
It is interesting to reflect on the nature of this triumph. Ricardo
carried over intact Smith's philosophy of freedom. I think there can be
little doubt that this fact, together with Ricardo's attack on the landlords,
was primarily the reason for the triumph. The policy implications
were thoroughly in accord with that particular phase of British
economic development. Statesmen, industrialists, and merchants could
readily understand and heartily endorse them. Indeed, they had by
then long been living by these rules, and were doubtless delighted to
find that they had all along been right, and even scientific.
But few laymen could have known much about Ricardo's theory of
value and distribution, any more than most laymen today (who like
to divide us all into Keynesians and anti-Keynesians) have any understanding
of the Keynesian system, but base their bias, for or against,
solely on what they conceive to be the policy implications. For me the
great paradox of classical economics is that, whereas it began with dynamics,
providing the rationale for revolutionary economic changes, it
wound up in a tight system of static equilibrium theory, which in striving
for logical consistency became increasingly remote from reality.
This I think we can ascribe mainly to Ricardo's theory of value and
distribution. Economics had taken a major turn in the road-a turn
away from Smith's causes of wealth, and a turn which I think has
mainly characterized economic theorizing ever since.
Immediately following his striking single-page first chapter, in which
he promises to reduce classical economics to the status of a special
case under his own general theory, Keynes begins his Chapter II, on
"The Postulates of Classical Economics," with the statement: "Most
treatises on the theory of Value and Production are primarily concerned
with the distribution of a given volume of employed resources between
different uses and with the conditions which, assuming the employment
of this quantity of resources, determine their relative rewards