by annual incomes properly reflect trends in distribution by
secular incomes? As technology and economic performance rise to
higher levels, incomes are less subject to transient disturbances, not
necessarily of the cyclical order that can be recognized and allowed
for by reference to business cycle chronology, but of a more irregular
type. If in the earlier years the economic fortunes of units were subject
to greater vicissitudes-poor crops for some farmers, natural
calamity losses for some nonfarm business units-if the over-all proportion
of individual entrepreneurs whose incomes were subject to such
calamities, more yesterday but some even today, was larger in earlier
decades, these earlier distributions of income would be more affected
by transient disturbances. In these earlier distributions the temporarily
unfortunate might crowd the lower quintiles and depress their shares
unduly, and the temporarily fortunate might dominate the top quintile
and raise its share unduly-proportionately more than in the distributions
for later years. If so, distributions by longer-term average incomes
might show less reduction in inequality than do the distributions
by annual incomes; they might even show an opposite trend.
One may doubt whether this qualification would upset a narrowing
of inequality as marked as that for the United States, and in as short
a period as twenty-five years. Nor is it likely to affect the persistent
downward drift in the spread of the distributions in the United Kingdom.
But I must admit a strong element of judgment in deciding how
far this qualification modifies the finding of long-term stability followed
by reduction in income inequality in the few developed countries for
which it is observed or is likely to be revealed by existing data. The
important point is that the qualification is relevant; it suggests need for
further study if we are to learn much from the available data concerning
the secular income structure; and such study is likely to yield
results of interest in themselves in their bearing upon the problem
of trends in temporal instability of income flows to individual units
or to economically significant groups of units in different sectors of
the national economy.
II. An Attempt at Explanation
If the above summary of trends in the secular income structure of
developed countries comes perilously close to pure guesswork, an
attempt to explain these dimly discernible trends may surely seem
foolhardy. Yet it is necessary to do so if only to bring to the surface
some factors that may have been at play; induce a search for data
bearing upon these factors; and thus confirm or revise our impressions
of the trends themselves. Such preliminary speculations are useful