construct of a profit-maximizing reactor.5 I shall come back to this
after discussing the demands for "more realistic" assumptions where
they are plainly irrelevant and therefore out of place.
Realistic Models of the Firm under Competition
Many of the proponents and protagonists of a more realistic theory
of the firm are quite aware of the fact that the managerial extension
and enrichment of the concept of the firm was not needed except where
firms in the industry were large and few, and not under the pressure of
competition. There are many very quotable statements to this effect.'
Too many students, however, want a realistic model of the firm for
all purposes. They forget the maxim of Occam's Razor that unnecessary
terms in a theory be kept out (or shaved off). These students
seem to miss in a simplified model the realistic trimmings of the observable
world; they distrust such a model because it is obviously
'You may wonder whether I have changed my mind on these matters. Incidentally, I  hold that it is important for scholars and scientists to have an open mind, and the only  evidence showing that they do are instances in which they have actually changed their  minds. On this particular issue, however, I cannot oblige. Whether I am right or wrong,
I have been consistent regarding these points. Let me quote from an article I wrote 28
years ago: "The problem of oligopoly is by definition the problem of the effects of the  actions of few, giving a greater importance to the behavior of each member of the group.  . . . The theory of the oligopoly price involves an interpretation of the significant motives  behind the actions of a small number of people.... Even the most superficial theory will
have to include many more ideal types of behavior in order to handle the problem of
few sellers than it takes to handle the problem of a mass of competitive sellers"
[20, p. 235].
On the other hand, I must plead guilty to a charge of the same error of misplaced  concreteness against which I have just warned. It occurred in a sentence in which I spoke
of various magnitudes (subjectively) "perceived or fancied by the men whose decisions or  actions are to be explained (the business men) . . ." [21, p. 521]. If this sentence referred  only to oligopolistic or monopolistic behavior, it would not be so bad, for, as I said above,  the theoretical constructs of decision-makers in this case have a closer correspondence to  real businessmen than the constructs in the theory of competitive prices. But the sentence
was supposed to apply to the constructs of the firm in any position whatever. Hence it  was a misleading sentence in that (1) it gave the impression that the decision-makers in
question were real men (real businessmen, whom you could interview) and (2) it said  that the actions of these men were to be explained, whereas the purpose of the theory  was not to explain observed actions but only observable results of imtgined (postulated)
reactions to observable events.
I apologize for this error. Not that I do not approve of a busy shuttle-traffic between  the domain of theoretical construction and the domain of empirical observation, but we
must never fail to specify the side of the frontier on which we happen to be. The  theoretical terms may have empirical referents (counterparts), but to believe, or allow
an impression of belief, that the two are identical is a methodological fallacy.  " g4When the conditions of competition are relaxed . . . the opportunity set of the firm  is expanded. In this case, the behavior of the firm as a distinct operating unit is of sepa-  rate interest. Both for purposes of interpreting particular behavior within the firm as  well as for predicting responses of the industry aggregate, it may be necessary to identify  the factors that influence the firm's choices within this expanded opportunity set and  embed these in a formal model" [48, pp. 2-3].