or by some exponents of Social Darwinism. After all, it was economic
environment with which economists worked, and it was their
usual view as well as Marshall's that A. C. Pigou [29, pp. 113-14, 121]
expressed when, despite his awareness of the importance of genetic selection,
he said, "The environment of one generation can produce a
lasting result, because it can affect the environment of future generations.
Environments, in short, as well as people, have children." He inferred,
furthermore, that "improvement in the distribution of the dividend
may be expected actually to diminish the proportion of the children
born from inferior stocks" whose untrammeled propagation remained
"notorious." Pigou seems to have been less alert than Ricardo
(Principles, Ch. 31), however, to the possible depression of the demand
for labor, especially among the inferior members of society, by
accumulating capital. Otherwise he might have put more stress upon
eugenics as well as upon adverse effects of life in large, input-short
families.

4. Corollary to Malthus's thesis is the notion that there exists,
under given conditions in a given state, an optimum population size
and an optimum population growth rate. J. S. Mill was the first to give
some precision to the former notion. "After a degree of density has
been attained, sufficient to allow the principal benefits of combination
of labour," wrote Mill in 1848, "all further increase tends in itself to
mischief, as regards the average condition of the people." Such density
had been attained in England. Mechanical inventions could, of course,
increase average income, but they would increase it even more were
numbers not to grow (Principles, I, xiii, 2-3; IV, vi, 2). Unlike presentday
technicians with their dehumanizingly exclusive emphasis upon
know-how, Mill was concerned also with know-why-he was not prepared
to trade natural grandeur, solitude, "the spontaneous activity of
nature," and other free goods for the junkyards and carscapes and deteriorating
landscapes so characteristic of unaesthetic twentieth-century
societies seemingly bent upon frustrating Henry Ford's desire that his
car give even the man of little means easy access to "God's great open
spaces." Mill would probably have endorsed B. A. Weisbrod's suggestion
that account be taken of the willingness of nonusers of facilities
(e.g., a park) to pay for the option of using them in the future, given
that total revenue from users falls short of costs [37].
Mill's view was endorsed 78 years later by A. B. Wolfe, foremost
economic demographer, who declared that "economically, the desideratum
is . . . to obtain, in return for whatever expenditure of effort the
people may regard as normal and proper, the largest permanently
practicable, per capita product" [15, p. 68]. The population permitting
this woulld be of optimum size. WVolfe did not accept, any more