increase in the variety of products (including services such as increased
opportunity to travel) surely are factors adding greatly to economic
welfare while finding inadequate expression in output figures.
In the international sphere the replacement of direct controls by the
price mechanism was much slower and in some countries less complete
than in the domestic area. But by 1959 the currencies of all industrial
countries were again more or less convertible; in other words, exchange
control was dismantled although restrictions on capital movements still
exist in many countries. Moreover, inmport quotas were gradually removed,
first in intra-European trade, but then largely also on dollar
imports and later, although still incompletely, on imports from Japan.
This freeing of trade constitutes a movement towards world-wide
integration that has preceded and overlapped the regional reduction of
trade barriers and regional integration in the European Common
Market and other similar schemes of which we hear so much. There
can be hardly a doubt that, up to now, the quantitative effects on trade
of the world-wide integration and liberalization have been much greater
than those of the miiuch more discussed and advertised regional schemes.
VI. The Growth of World Trade and the
Less Devcloped Countries
Now to the controversial and extremely important question of the
participation of the less developed countries in the over-all expansion
of world trade. From a careful study of postwar facts and figures, the
conclusion emerges, I believe, that the less developed countries have
greatly benefited from the expansion of world trade and that the prosperity
in "the industrial centers" has spread to "the less developed
periphery."
This result is not surprising; both classical and Keynesian theory,
speaking with complete harmony on this matter, lead to the strong presumption,
though not the absolute certainty, that the rapid growth of
the industrial countries will benefit the less developed countries by increasing
the demand for their exports, by making a more liberal supply
of capital and aid funds possible and, taking a broader and longer view,
by developing numerous new technologies and products, many of which
are extremely useful for the less developed countries. It is nevertheless
necessary to dwell on the matter and carefully to establish the meaning,
validity, and implications of the above statement because it runs
counter to widely held pessimistic views. The extreme form of these
heretical doctrines-heretical to the classical as well as the Keynesian
theory-is represented by the transference to the international sphere
of the Marxian theory of "increasing misery" (Verelendungstheorie).
Since it really makes no sense any more to say that the American,
European, or Japanese workers are getting poorer all the time, modern