tionally interested parties make a concrete and responsible bargain from
whose outcome they themselves derive gain or suffer loss. The answers
which the legislator gives to economic problems tend to be class or
pressure-group answers not differentiated according to the peculiarities
of local situations nor resolved into any consistent pattern of direction
for the economy as a whole.
It is largely in recognition of the limitations of legislative handling
of business relations that there has been so great an expansion of the
administrative arm of government. The bureaus through which these
administrative agencies function seek not merely to direct business
along lines marked out by legislative declarations of policy; they also
draft new legislative proposals or modifications and extensions of older
laws. Presumably the formulation of "the common good" by a trained
civil service will be less opportunistic or less cynical than that of a
parliamentary body. The proponents of government planning no doubt
believe sincerely that through such professional guidance we shall
attain competent direction and put an end to political patchwork.
But this administrative formulation and promotion of ends, even when
sincerely conceived as the "common good," does not give us objective
values.6 There is a certain intellectual arrogance in the idea that the
government bureau knows best. It cannot know the actual situations
with which it must deal except by proxy, and the proxy can never
be more than approximately right. Government can see only through
the eyes of its officials who, of necessity, are concerned to simplify
complex reality to an operating rule. The larger the role of direction
assumed by central government, the closer do we approach to a dictatorship
of the capitalists, of the proletariat, of the Republicans, of
the Democrats, of the New Deal, or of whoever may ride the "wave of
the future."
Only those who are actual participants in an enterprise confronted
by a concrete situation are capable of saying whether they would value
a particular kind of security above a certain amount of income, whether
they can afford to accept this lower wage as an alternative to that
amount of unemployment, or whether they would settle for specific
discomforts rather than lose prestige or be forced to give up a long
familiar habitat or break a long-established routine. These diverse
' In this section I have employed the expression "common good" to describe the
objective envisaged by legislators and government officials at their best, whereas throughout
the paper I use common interest to describe the objective of voluntary collective bargaining.
Concepts of the common good distort or complicate strictly economic considerations by the
intrusion of ethical or aesthetic preconceptions of the official or other person using the
term. "Interest" connotes synthetic objectification similar to that embodied in the
concept of market demand. There is a common interest in high total productivity if only
we can discover means of allowing it to come to expression.