when allies too; must be fed and clothed. If it is thus prepared, however,
its production potential easily becomes a peacetime surplus, or remains
one when the war is over.

H-owever, it is in the longer-run interrelationships of agriculture and
the rest of the economy that the "mutualness" is most outstanding. It
is clear from other statements in this address, and I am sure, from
Mrs. Wickens' paper in the Economic Growth II session this morning,
that in spite of the great progress in the arts of agriculture that agricultural
leaders boast, prices of farm products in 1910 were relatively
high in historical terms, aiid in 1950 even as compared with 1910-a
1950 index of 258 on the 1910 base as compared with 236 for the general
price level. It may be argued that land is a scarce and more or less
fixed factor of production and that it is bound to rise in value as the
man-land ratio rises, and prices of farm products along with it.
Surely urban land values rise as a city grows, and why not farm land
as the urban economy expands? But it is clear from analysis in Section
II that agricultural technology can advance at a rate that makes farm
land less scarce rather than more scarce. It surely has done so since
1940, and gives promise of doing so for the next twenty years at least.
Surely, however, to feed and help clothe the 82 millions more nonfarm
people of the United States in 1950 than in 1900, and do it very much
better, with almost a half the workers is a tremendous achievement,
and the no-tfarm sector of the economy not only needs to recognize this
fully, but to stand ready to support all well-conceived measures to continue
this progress in the decades ahead.

On the other side is what progress in the sciences and the arts in
the nonfarm sector mean to the farm sector. Matched against the
more and better food and clothing that the farms have contributed to
the cities at only small increases in relative prices are what the cities
lhave contributed to the progress in farming and farm living-automobiles
and motor transport, most of modern power-farming equipment,
commercial fertilizers, modern communication, movies, radio
and television, modern home facilities, in so far as they have reached
farm people, and the like. It is true that the basic research for some
of these was done in the U.S Department of Agriculture and the Land
Grant Experiment Stations, but the cities paid their full share of the
cost of this.

In balancing these two contributions, we must bear in mind that,
after all, city folks are spending only a fourth of their incomes for
foods, and more than a half of this one fourth goes to transport,
processing, and middleman services. A gain of a fourth in the arts of
producing food on the farm represents, if all is passed on to consumers,
only a 3 per cent gain in urban living, whereas the same fractional