days to experiment with this kind of government action.
To my mind the fact that so little attention has been paid to this
possibility is convincing evidence that the model-analysis oversimplifications
of the profit system and competition and the persistent propensity
for economic theorizing to push in a laissez-faire direction have
tended to act as serious restraints on the freedom of economic inquiry
and to discourage explorations by economists of ways-structural planning,
for example-to improve the functioning of our free enterprise
system. At all events current explorations of this sort are distinctly
timid. I venture to hope that as we become more precise in our statement
of the way competition and other institutions perform the centralmanagement
functions, our explorations of how to improve our private
enterprise system will grow bolder.

Such greater precision should mean regarding many of the things
government does in the economic sphere as supplements to the working
of our free enterprise system, not as interferences with it. But there are
clearly ways in which government action can interfere. Let me mention
one. Freedom of enterprise means the management of a business has a
wide discretion regarding the transactions it enters into so that in general
for any individual transaction no other party's consent is needed
except the consent of the other party to the transaction. But any law
that leaves an unduly wide discretion to judicial interpretation, however
laudable it may be substantively, interferes with freedom of enterprise
during the period when it is being interpreted. Having to get a
determination of the meaning of such a statute by a law suit can be
quite as serious a restriction on enterprise freedom as it would be to
have to get approval for a budget item from the economy's central
manager if we had one. Every new law requires some interpretations;
the vaguer or newer its wording the more it requires. The recently enacted
internal revenue act is an example. We have put a needlessly
large number of such free-enterprise-restricting provisions on the statute
books during the past 25 years.

The two views of competition I have distinguished often differ on
the adequacy of competition as a regulator that will induce the firms in
a given industry to produce products of a safficiently high quality and
prevent them from charging an unduly high level of prices. Hence they
often suggest different economic policies. But let me conclude my discussion
of competition by commenting briefly on a matter of policy on
which these two views largely agree. They agree in condemning discriminations
in prices and in other terms of trade that serve no public
purpose. And many of those who take the perfect-market view would
agree with those who take the institutional-supplements view that competition
is inadequate as a regulator when it comes to price differentials