'thirties a large proportion of this equipment lay idle. Variations in the
degree to which available capital was utilized created some difficulties
within the ordinary business cycles which prevailed between 1899 and
1919 when each of the four phases of the cycle did not last for more
than one or two years. But the period between the two wars was quite
extraordinary in that we had high prosperity from 1922 to the fall of
1929 and that we did not fully recover from the collapse which then
set in until 1941. It was this fundamental difficulty which prevented one
of my students, Mr. Leonard Felsenthal, from developing a satisfactory
production function for Germany in the inter-war period. I shall, therefore,
await with sympathetic interest the paper on this subject which
Mr. Burton Wall is to give tomorrow.

IV. The Production Function as Based on Plant Averages Rather
than Industry Aggregates

The inductive values which have thus far been developed in the
cross-section or inter-industry studies have been based on industry
aggregates, namely the totals of workers, capital, and net values added
by manufacturing in each industry. This method is somewhat disconcerting
to those who are accustomed in their a priori reasoning to start
with the theory of production for the individual firm and who then
move to a model for a given industry but who shy away from developing
a theory of production for the economy as a whole or from the
manufacturing sector of that economy. Such theorists probably believe
that we are starting at the wrong end and that we should begin
instead with the individual firm rather than the whole manufacturing
sector of the economy and that we should consider the production function
within these units rather than deal with inter-industry and aggregate
functions.

There are two answers to this position. The first is that I should be
very glad indeed to make studies of individual firms if the necessary
data were available. But statistics on the changing quantities of labor
and capital which are used over a period of time by individual firms,
and the amounts of product which are thus turned out by them, are
some of the most carefully guarded secrets of business. I am reluctant
to believe that we should stop all our investigations until all of these
facts are forthcoming for a multitude of firms.

Secondly, I personally see no reason why we cannot approach this
problem from either end and study the macrocosm as well as the
microcosm. No one, for example, in the physical sciences would propose
that we give up using the telescope because the microscope had
not yielded all its secrets. Why should we not, therefore, study the