tion between economics and ethics, and the sooner we shall see that
acquisitive conflict is inherent in human affairs, at least in any system
based on division of labor. Such conflict can be kept from destructive
effect only by a spirit of reasonableness and forbearance, a sense of
public responsibility which transcends party, and class, and pressure
groups, and an organization of strictly nonpartisan public agencies,
quasi-administrative, quasi-judicial, for the effective, peaceful, and
prompt adjustment of industrial disputes. Substitution of socialism for
capitalism would change the configuration of distributive conflicts, but
it would not abolish them. Nothing can. .
It is erroneous to think of the acquisitive urge only in terms of
money. It is also desire for power; and the methods of power range
all the way from the flicker of a girl's eyelashes to the manipulations
of high finance. In the past, men have desired great wealth not only
for the power it gave them, but for the prestige of the showy manner
in which it enabled them to live. It was an effective way of inflating
infantile egos. I am not under the illusion that infantilism has entirely
disappeared from the mentality of all men of prominence, but there
are distinct indications that conspicuous show in living is going out of
mode. The change has been accelerated by depression and high taxes,
but it promises a profound alteration in social and esthetic attitudes.
Conspicuous waste and vain show will more and more be regarded for
what they are-the exhibitionism of the barbarian and the immature
personality. The proposal to limit incomes to $25,000 was a bit extreme,
but the fact that reaction to it was not more violent is evidence of a
changing ethos and growing public insight into the principle of economy
as applied to the consumption as well as to the production of wealth.
If attitudes toward showy living are changing, so are those toward
power for its own sake, though here the evidence is less clear. It seems
obvious, however, that those former gods of big business, the so-called
malefactors-of-great-wealth, have long since entered their G6tterd'
ammerung. Only in dim memory can we now hear their cynical cry,
"The public be damned!" The power motive is now more frequently
coupled to what David Hume called "public utility," and we call the
social point of view. It may be that this salutary change is due to
business men's tardy recognition of the hard economic necessitiessince,
after all, the public furnishes the demand for what business has
to sell-but in any case it is one more evidence of the growth of democracy.
Only in a democracy are power and responsibility reliably conjoined.

I have been speaking primarily of the attitudes of the so-called
capitalist class. Now what of labor? Here, too, we are witnessing an
evolution, but for the moment it seems to be in the direction of intensi-