ple, Brazilians did a few years ago. Then wages must rise at that rate
simply to keep real wages unchanged. An excess supply of labor will be
reflected in a less rapid rise in nominal wages than in anticipated
prices,4 not in an absolute decline in wages. When Brazil embarked on
a policy to bring down the rate of price rise, and succeeded in bringing
the price rise down to about 45 per cent a year, there was a sharp ini-
tial rise in unemployment because under the influence of earlier antici-
pations, wages kept rising at a pace that was higher than the new rate
of price rise, though lower than earlier. This is the result experienced,
and to be expected, of all attempts to reduce the rate of inflation below
that widely anticipated.5
To avoid misunderstanding, let me emphasize that by using the term
"natural" rate of unemployment, I do not mean to suggest that it is im-
mutable and unchangeable. On the contrary, many of the market char-
acteristics that determine its level are man-made and policy-made. In
the United States, for example, legal minimum wage rates, the Walsh-
Healy and Davis-Bacon Acts, and the strength of labor unions all make
the natural rate of unemployment higher than it would otherwise be.
Improvements in employment exchanges, in availability of information
about job vacancies and labor supply, and so on, would tend to lower
the natural rate of unemployment. I use the term "natural" for the
same reason Wicksell did-to try to separate the real forces from mon-
etary forces.
Let us assume that the monetary authority tries to peg the "market"
rate of unemployment at a level below the "natural" rate. For definite-
ness, suppose that it takes 3 per cent as the target rate and that the
"natural" rate is higher than 3 per cent. Suppose also that we start out
at a time when prices have been stable and when unemployment is
higher than 3 per cent. Accordingly, the authority increases the rate of
monetary growth. This will be expansionary. By making nominal cash