need rather than demonstrated performance. Just as relative immunity
of an organ's cells to division and mutation causes that organ
to age, so does the relative immunity of a society to rigorous selection
tend to bring about its deterioration. It may be well, however, for one
interpreting these portentous trends to recall what Samuel Johnson
wrote in the preface to his dictionary about the prophecies he had
made earlier in his launching prospectus: "I . . . now begin to fear that
I have indulged expectation which neither reason nor experience justify.
" Yet, mankind does appear to be at a demographic crossroads,
along which weak homeostatic response under current conditions may
not properly direct man. Population growth still resembles too closely
Newton's "uniform motion in a straight line," unrelieved by the prospective
emergence of fertility-controlling "impressed forces."
Consider India. Down one of the crossroads could lie a sanguine future.
For, as S. J. Patel suggests, the economic distance between India
and present-day America might be bridged, though hardly in a halfcentury;
the difference between Indian and American real agricultural
output per capita could be removed in some 50 years; that in other
sectors, in a longer period. Yet, as Coale and Hoover have shown,
there can be little improvement in the average Indian's lot if India
persists down the road of population growth [26].

Mlore generally, to paraphrase President Kennedy's warning against
war: Unless man halts population growth, population growth will halt
man. As matters stand, two demographic processes are bound to bedevil
man increasingly and, if they are not soon resolved, will greatly diminish
whatever prospect he h1as of establishing a society both peaceful
and great, both moral and aesthetic. These two processes are continuing
population growth in a finite world and increasing concentration
of people in progressively larger megalopolitan centers. Progeny
and space will have to be rationed much more effectively in the future
than in the past.

The more remote prospect is bleak while the immediate prospect,
blurred by current income growth, is misleadingly hopeful. Population
growth-demographic entropy-is dissipating man's capacity for
maneuver mnuch as economic entropy is dissipating the utility locked
up in depletable natural resources. After all, increase in number is an
essentially irreversible process; men usually multiply, but they seldom
dwindle as did avian, mammalian, and other species now extinct. Even
in the United States should natural increase plus a prospective annual
immigration of 350,000 long continue to increase population 1.0-1.5
per cent per year, our population, 325-350 million in 2010, would number
0.8-1.33 billion by 2100, and 1.5-2.8 billion (with perhaps onefourth
nonwhite) two centuries hence. Acres of land of all sorts per