to these demands, we are heavily dependent upon cultural and
political processes, and these are slow and the lags are long compared to
the behavior of markets serving the formation of nonhuman capital.
Xhere the capital market does serve human investments, it is subject to
more imperfections than in financing physical capital. I have already
stressed the fact that our tax laws discriminate in favor of nonhuman
capital. Then, too, many individuals face serious uncertainty in assessing
their innate talents when it comes to investing in themselves, especially
through higher education. Nor is it easy either for public deci,
sions or private behavior to untangle and properly assess the consumption
and the investment components. The fact that the return to high
school and to higher education has been about as large as the return to
conventional forms of capital when all of the costs of such education including
income foregone by students are allocated to the investment
component, creates a strong presumption that there has been underinvestment
since, surely, much education is cultural and in that sense it is
consumption. It is no wonder, in view of these circumstances, that there
should be substantial underinvestment in human beings, even though
we take pride, and properly so, in the support that we have given to
education and to other activities that contribute to such investments.
8. Should the returns from public investment in human capital
accrue to the individuals in whom it is made?"9 The policy issues implicit
in this question run deep and they are full of perplexities pertaining
both to resource allocation and to welfare. Physical capital that is
formed by public investment is not transferred as a rule to particular
individuals as a gift. It would greatly simplify the allocative process
if public investment in human capital were placed on the same footing.
What then is the logical basis for treating public investment in human
capital differently? Presumably it turns on ideas about welfare. A
strong welfare goal of our community is to reduce the unequal distribution
of personal income among individuals and families. Our community
has relied heavily on progressive income and inheritance taxation.
Given public revenue from these sources, it may well be true that
public investment in human capital, notably that entering into general
education, is an effective and efficient set of expenditures for attaining
this goal. Let me stress, however, that the state of knowledge about
these issues is woefully meager.
9. My last policy comment is on assistance to underdeveloped countries
to help them achieve economic growth. Here, even more than in
domestic affairs, investment in human beings is likely to be underrated
191 am indebted to Milton Friedman for bringing this issue to the fore in his comments
on an early draft of this paper. See preface of [7] and also Jacob Mincer's pioneering
paper [13].