the relation between the factors affecting the size of functional shares
and factor compensation and the diminished inequality in personal
income distribution shown by the National Bureau study of Kuznets?
Are the answers which we put forward in connection with income distribution
consistent with those which we find when we analyze the
process of wage determination in the current economy?
We have dealt also with the effects upon the structure and functioning
of the American economy of the institutionalization of saving and
investment and the extraordinary intermingling of these processes with
those of the creation and management of the money supply. We raise
tihe question: To what extent does the quantity of capital available
depend upon individual decisions to consume or to refrain from consumption
as compared with the effect of decisions to invest by the managements
of corporations or of governments to run deficits, as selfgenerating
factors in increasing the money-capital supply?
Closely related is the problem in which it seemed at one time we were
to be completely swallowed up. Can the private economy be expected to
maintain the level of investment and consumption necessary to support
a tolerable level of employment if the government reduces substantially
its now gigantic expenditures for national defense or wipes out the
budgetary deficit?
This problem, whiclh involves the whole Keynesian type of analysis,
is tied in with our general subject from two directions. It has been
argued that the failure of our economy to maintain full employment is
due to the "stickiness" of prices and wages. Such "stickiness" could
hardly exist in a fully comnpetitive economy. The monetary aspects of our
economy are fundamental to its essential character. Whenever depression
characterizes the economy we can be sure that measures which
will be proposed to cure the depression are not going to be of a purely
monetary character but are likely to affect profoundly the nature of our
economic system.
Finally, turning from the domestic scene, we raise the question of the
validity of orthodox international trade theory in a world characterized
by current economic institutions. As Viner puts it in the last two
sentences in the introduction to his International Economics published
in 1951:
The world has changed greatly, and is now a world of planned economies,
of state trading, of substantially arbitrary and inflexible national price
structures, and of managed instability in exchange rates. The classical
theory is not directly relevant for such a world, and it may be that for
such a world there is and can be no relevant general theory.'
1 It may well be that these two sentences do not adequately represent Viner's considered
position on this subject.