Standards of living most obviously change for individuals, as they
progress from infancy through childhood, adolescence, youth, maturity,
family life in its successive phases, and old age. Needs, preferences, and
priorities alter through this human cycle. For the family groups in
which most individuals live, moreover, standards of living change as the
group's composition undergoes successive alterations. They also change
for communities as these grow or decline and are affected by outside
forces as well as by internal evolution. They change for nations, as
we have witnessed repeatedly in the past thirty years. We are now in
the throes of changes in the standards of living of the community of
nations.
Standards change both under the pressure of necessity and under
the pull of opportunity. They change under the influence of physiological,
psychological, and social factors or forces. Major transitions from
one standard to another inevitably involve pain, sometimes more than
offset by compensations, whether the cause is birth or death, marriage
or divorce, prosperity or depression, threat of war or prospect of peace.
Alongside the current standard of living in the strict sense just explained,
there is the deferred standard of living. Young people in high
* school or college, engaged couples looking forward to marriage, older
folk looking forward to retirement, and people in general in the midst
of depression and war, all develop more or less articulate ideas as to
the kind of living they urgently want when a stage looked forward to
is reached. Though recognized as a standard for deferred application,
this figures in the atmosphere components of the current plane and
standard of living. Individual and group morale depends heavily on the
character of such deferred standards. If these seem reasonably attainable
in the not too distant future, current standards will be readjusted
so that the current living content will be tolerable even if it is
grossly inferior to former standards in respect of consumption, working
conditions, and freedoms. If it seems hopeless to expect to regain
former standards, to say nothing of attaining ampler ones, the atmosphere
component of current living is so profoundly affected that the
basis for revolutionary explosions is laid.
The deferred standard of living, indeed, frequently rises during a
period of severely depressed planes of living. In this country,consumption
standards rose strikingly above predepression levels during the
1930's, especially in respect to durable consumers' goods. Technical
improvements, cost reductions, low-price policies, and effective advertising
led to impressive enlargement of the role of many durable consumer
goods in American life. This culminated in the huge output and purchases
of durable consumer goods in 1941. It is not yet generally