3. City dwellers have larger property incomes than farm families.
The adjustment for this needs to be at least $100.
4. Almost exactly half of the farms in the United States were in
the three Southern divisions in 1950, where average incomes of the
whole population are well below the national average. The reason that
they are lower is by no means simply that they are more agricultural.
Some of the differences, for example, is due to the one-third lower average
income of Negroes, by no means all employed in agriculture. The
average farm income in the South was a third below the national
average in 1950. By income classes of farms in 1950, 26 per cent in
the South were classed as residential, with sales of farm products of
less than $200, compared with 12 in the North; and 39 per cent as
low-income commercial farms, compared with 22 in the North.
Adjustment for this fourth item cannot very well be estimated
because it is difficult to determine how much of the disparity resulting
from it is agricultural and how much regional. One way of studying
it is to make the adjustments needed for Numbers 1, 2, and 3 state by
state and see how much disparity is left in what states. It seems likely
that there will not be a great deal left in most of the states in the
North and West. The remaining disparity in the national averages
will then prove to be largely a matter of the heavy weighting of agriculture
in the South. The adjustment for this may well prove to be the
largest of the four. It will be large enough, in fact, so that combined with
the others, the farm and nonfarm per capita incomes will be brought
within a few or several hundred dollars of each other after these adjustments
are made in the figures.
One can conclude from the foregoing, therefore, that the greater
gains made by agriculture since 1910, and especially since 1940, have
brought per capita farm incomes within striking distance of their nonfarm
counterparts. The how and when will be considered in the next
section. It may well be pointed out here, however, that this operation
will not be a fast one. A new generation of farmers will be needed to
make many of the changes, especially in the low-income areas where
most of the changes are most needed. But of course one thirty-third of
a new generation is born each year. Also it will be a long time if ever
before the two incomes become altogether equal in terms of any money
values that can be computed. The satisfactions of working for one's
self on a farm will continue to offset money income for many born
and reared on farms. Automobiles and roads, modern communication,
television, electricity and refrigeration, modern housing, and the easing
of the burden of heavy physical farm work through mechanization, are
rapidly removing the disadvantages of farm life and adding to its
advantages.