capabilities. I shall concentrate on five major categories: (1) health
facilities and services, broadly conceived to include all expenditures
that affect the life expectancy, strength and stamina, and the vigor
and vitality of a people; (2) on-the-job training, including old-style
apprenticeship organized by firms; (3) formally organized education
at the elementary, secondary, and higher levels; (4) study programs
for adults that are not organized by firms, including extension programs
notably in agriculture; (5) migration of individuals and families
to adjust to changing job opportunities. Except for education, not
much is known about these activities that is germane here. I shall refrain
from commenting on study programs for adults, although in agriculture
the extension services of the several states play an important
role in transmitting new knowledge and in developing skills of farmers
[ 17] . Nor shall I elaborate further on internal migration related to economic
growth.

Health activities have both quantity and quality implications. Such
speculations as economists have engaged in about the effects of improvements
in health,6 has been predominantly in connection with
population growth, which is to say with quantity. But surely health
measures also enhance the quality of human resources. So also may additional
food and better shelter, especially in underdeveloped countries.
The change in the role of food as people become richer sheds light
on one of the conceptual problems already referred to. I have! pointed
out that extra food in some poor countries has the attribute of a "producer
good." This attribute of food, however, diminishes as the consumption
of food rises, and there comes a point at which any further
increase in food becomes pure consumption.! Clothing, housing and
perhaps medical services may be similar.

My comment about on-the-job training will consist of a conjecture
on the amount of such training, a note on the decline of apprenticeship,
and then a useful economic theorem on who bears the costs of such
training. Surprisingly little is known about on-the-job training in
modern industry. About all that can be said is that the expansion of
education has not eliminated it. It seems likely, however, that some
of the training formerly undertaken by firms has been discontinued
and other training programs have been instituted to adjust both to the
'Health economics is in its infancy; there are two medical journals with "economics" in
their titles, two bureaus for economic research in private associations (one in the American
Medical and the other in the American Dental Association), and not a few studies and
papers by outside scholars. Selma Mushkin's survey is very useful with its pertinent economic
insights, though she may have underestimated somewhat the influence of the
economic behavior of people in striving for health [14].
7For instance, the income elasticity of the demand for food continues to be positive
even after the point is reached where additional food no longer has the attribute of a
"producer good."
