all those cases in which the interference of the central authority in the
transactions between man and man is capable of effecting good or avert-
ing evil, laissez faire is a criminal abandonment of the functions for the
performance of which a central authority is established and maintained.7
Hence Torrens, and equally Senior,8 criticized the ten-hour bill because
it would lower weekly wages, increase production costs, and reduce
employment by impairing the competitive position of the British tex-
tile industry abroad.
Both Senior and Torrens died in 1864, so they had adequate time,
one would think, to have tested their predictions of the effects of the
ten-hour law. It is wholly characteristic of the insulation of discussions
of policy from empirical evidence that no such study was undertaken
by them, or by anyone else.
James Mill's oldest son, surprisingly enough, put up a stronger case
against state control of economic life than his much more conservative
father had. John Stuart did not follow his father in accepting the in-
variable wisdom of the democratic state, possibly because he was writ-
ing well after the Reform Act.9 He rested the case much more on the
defense of individual liberty, and fully three of the five reasons he gave
for favoring laissez faire as a practical maxim were variations on the
importance of the dignity, independence, self-reliance, and development
of the individual [7, Bk. V, Ch. 11] .
Although I reckon myself among the most fervent admirers of in-
dividualism, even for other people, I must concede that the younger
Mill's position was ambiguous. He does not tell us how to determine
whether a given public policy frees or inhibits individuals. Suppose I
contemplate a program of public housing. If I bribe or force people
into such housing, of course I have reduced their area of choice and
responsibility. But I have also, I presumably hope, given a generation
of children a chance to grow up in quarters that are not grossly unsan-
itary and inadequate for physical and moral health. Mill does not tell
us whether this policy fosters or inhibits individualism-although I
strongly suspect that he would have favored public housing, as he did
free public education and limitation of hours of work for young people.
If an economist is to be a moral philosopher, however-and I have no
doubt that we would do this well too-he should develop his philosoDhv