the flexibility necessary for adaptation to changing social conditions
and values. It is safe to say that they will not give it that carte blanche
which reactionaries, yearning for the days of laissez faire, demand,
under the undefined term freedom of enterprise. The American people
want private enterprise, under necessary controls, because it is their
way of life also. As Mr. Wallace recently intimated, private enterprise,
like any other institution, is an economic instrument, not an end-value.'
Nevertheless, we shall not easily be divorced from it. Just how far it
can fall short of "full production and jobs enough to go around," and
still survive, no one knows. All are agreed, I think, that it could not
survive many more deep and prolonged depressions. It is apparently
in the back of the minds of some busineess leaders that even one more
serious depression would put a strain on it which it might stand and
might not. Private business can avoid this trial, not by blaming everything
on "bureaucracy" and "regimentation," nor by shouting freedom
from the housetops, but by understanding the conditions permanently
necessary for full production and full employment.
To judge private enterprise, however, or any other system, merely
on its power of survival is to put the whole matter on too low a plane.
Private enterprise should be evaluated on its ability to approach the
specifications of the ideal economy, to conform to the fundamental
principles of economy, and to maximize per capita real income. The
American people are going to make far more exacting demands on their
economy in the future than they have in the past. Private enterprise
has done so well that it will have to do much better. Business men will
have to raise their sights and extend their range.
To what extent are we reducing, or can we reduce, the great obstacles
to approach to ideal economy-namely the disturbing effects of technological
change, the pressure of religious and moral traditionalism,
the disruptive influences of acquisitive and power motives, and the
characteristics of our present economy, especially the great extremes
in the distribution of money income, which stand in the way of a
balanced and continuous market for goods?

As to the abolition of want the world over, I am frankly pessimistic,
until a real solution of the population problem, a solution now blocked
by religious prejudice, is possible. For our domestic economy, I am
optimistic, but with reservations. I believe that my impression of
growing breadth of perspective and increasing sense of social responsibility
on the part of business leaders is not wrong. If it has been
difficult, in the past few months, to maintain equal faith in the public
Address before the Herald-Tribune Forum, November, 1943. Published in full in the
New York Times, November 18, 1943.
