which benefits can be paid to an unemployed worker has become longer
and the typical weekly benefit has risen in greater proportion than the
cost of living. Furthermore, arrangements have recently been concluded
in several major industries whereby benefits to the unemployed are supplemented
from private sources.
Other parts of the vast system of social security that we have devised
since the 1930's have also served to support the flow of personal
income at times when business activity is declining. Payments made to
retired workers kept increasing during each recession of the postwar
period. The reason is partly that workers handicapped by old age or
physical disability experience greater difficulty at such times in keeping
their jobs or finding new ones and therefore apply for pensions in somewhat
larger numbers. Another factor has been the intermittent liberalization
of statutory benefits. But the most important reason for the
steady increase of old-age pensions is the maturing of the social security
system. In 1940, only 7 per cent of people of age 65 and over were
eligible for benefits from the old-age insurance trust fund, in contrast to
23 per cent in 1948 and 69 per cent in 1958. The trend of other public
pension programs and the various public assistance programs has also
been upward. Between 1929 and 1957 the social security and related
benefits paid out by our various governmental units rose from 1 per
cent of total personal income to 6 per cent. In 1933, with the economy
at a catastrophically low level, these benefit payments were merely $548
million larger than in 1929. On the other hand, in 1958-when business
activity was only slightly depressed-they were $4.4 billion above the
level of 1957. Even these figures understate the difference between current
conditions and those of a quarter century ago, for they leave out of
account the private pensions which are beginning to supplement public
pensions on a significant scale.
As a result of these several major developments in our national life,
the movement of aggregate personal income is no longer closely linked
to the movement of aggregate production. During the postwar period
we have had several brief but sizable setbacks in production. For example,
in the course of the recession of 1957-58, the physical output of
factories and mines fell 14 per cent, the physical output of commodities
and services in the aggregate fell 5.4 per cent, and the dollar volume
of total output fell 4.3 per cent. In earlier times personal incomes
would have responded decisively to such a decline in production. This
time the government absorbed a substantial part of the drop in the dollar
volume of production by putting up with a sharp decline of its revenues
despite the need to raise expenditures. Corporations absorbed
another part of the decline by maintaining dividends while their undistributed