due to such interindustry shifts in the service incomes of the initially
high-income groups are much more limited than for the population as a
whole: they are already in high-income occupations and industries and
the range for them toward higher paid occupations is more narrowly
circumscribed.

These three groups of factors, even disregarding such legislative and
political intervention as is indicated above, are all characteristics of a
dynamic growing economy. The differentials in rate of natural increase
between the upper- and the lower-income groups are true only of a
rapidly growing population-with or without immigration-but accompanied
by declining death rates and declining birth rates, a demographic
pattern associated in the past only with the growing Western
economies. The impact of new industries on obsolescence of already
established wealth as a source of property income is clearly a function
of rapid growth, and the more rapid the growth the greater the impact
will be. The effect of interindustry shifts on the rise of per capita
income, particularly of lower-income groups, is also a function of
growth since only in a growing economy is there much shift in the
relative importance of the several industrial sectors. One can then say,
in general, that the basic factor militating against the rise in upperincome
shares that would be produced by the cumulative effects of
concentration of savings, is the dynamism of a growing and free
economic society.

Yet while the discussion answers the original question, it yields
no determinate answer as to whether the trend in income shares of
upper groups is upward, downward, or constant. Even for the specific
question discussed, a determinate answer depends upon the relative
balance of factors-continuous concentration of savings making for
an increasing share, and the offsetting forces tending to cancel this
effect. To tell what the trend of upper-income shares is likely to be, we
need to know much more about the weights of these conflicting pressures.
Moreover, the discussion has brought to the surface factors that,
in and of themselves, may cause either an upward or a downward trend
in the share of upper-income groups and hence in income inequalityin
distributions of annual or of secular income. For example, the new
entrants into the upper groups-the upward "migrants"-who rise
either because of exceptional ability or attachment to new industries or
for a variety of other reasons-may be entering the fixed upper group
of say the top 5 per cent with an income differential-either annual or
long-term-that may be relatively greater than that of entrants in the
preceding generation. Nothing in the argument so far excludes this
possibility-which would mean a rise in the share of upper-income
groups, even if the share of the old "resident" part remains constant or