that many of the basic truths in the natural sciences were discovered
by similar nonexact methods, long before the present accurate
methods of measurement were known.

Although exact scientific measurements are impossible for the solution
of many economic problems, a scientific attitude is a sine qua non.
By that term I refer, first and foremost, to complete honesty and impartiality.
Economists, like all others who merit the high distinction
of being known as scholars and scientists, may never compromise with
truth and must have the courage of their convictions. Falsifying, coloring,
or twisting the truth is contemptible, whether it be done for compensation,
to gain notoriety, or to curry favor. A scientific attitude demands
an inquiring mind, a strong urge to know, and tireless industry
to explore every aspect of the problem. It calls for the rechecking of
results and a willingness to change opinions when the evidence warrants.
It appears most favorably when accompanied by personal
modesty and a high degree of fairness, manifested alike toward pioneers
and predecessors, contemporaries and those holding variant views. It
calls for thorough knowledge of what has been done before and for keeping
abreast with current research. These are difficult standards to meet,
but such an attitude is necessary and attainable, although the exactitude
of the natural sciences is presently impossible and may never be realized.
Much more harmful than the quest for the certainty of the natural
scientists is the attitude that economists should confine themselves to
aspects of practical problems that are strictly within the domain of
economics, defined as including little more than the price mechanism and
equilibrium analysis. Extremists holding this position scoff at the very
idea that anyone but an economist has anything worthwhile to say on
the solution of practical economic problems. Related is the idea that the
only worth-while answers to economic questions are to be found in applications
of general economic theory.

A less extreme variant is the view that economists should deal only
with the economic aspects of problems but should participate with other
social scientists in interdisciplinary research. This calls for each group
of social scientists tackling a given problem by its own methods and in
its specialized language, followed by an interchange of views between
all of the researchers. Through such a procedure a truer answer is expected
than can be gotten from a one-discipline approach by economists
or by any other group of social scientists. This position has something
like official blessing in the action of the foundations in especially encouraging
interdisciplinary research. No great discoveries have thus far
come from such interdisciplinary research, which may mean only that
it is too early to correctly appraise the results. Certain it is, that this is
costly research, best suited to wealthy foundations, large universities,