6. Procedures should be developed for paying part of the compensatory
payments not in cash, but in the form of aids to land and woodland
improvement and development, production adjustments, household
improvements, community development and the like.
The Longer-run Phase
What is outlined under this head are the lines of action that will
need to be started as soon as possible and continued indefinitely. This
will involve continuing most of what is outlined under the 10-year
program, but most of it on a standby basis. Thus there should be need
for compensatory payments only in periods of general business depression,
or of excess output of particular crops or livestock products, or
loss of market outlets. In the longer run, the protection furnished agriculture
against such vicissitudes should be on a level comparable witlh
that furnished small businesses and labor. Unemployment insurance as
at present by no means measures up to the level of what is here proposed
for agriculture on a short-run basis, and small businesses have
even less protection.
Most of what is needed in the longer run comes under the head of
stability for agriculture. By stabilizing agriculture we do not mnean
keeping it at a constant level, but rather keeping its growth and
development steady. The major part of the problem by far, of course,
lies outside of agriculture. If there were no wars or business cycles,
there would be left first the production cycles for hogs, beef cattle,
dairying, and the like, the quick ups and downs in poultry farming,
and probably some long sweeps in orchard fruits; second, the overexpansion
that commonly comes with a burst of new technology in a
line of production, and necessary leveling out or contraction following;
third, the rather sudden shifts in demand due to new developments in
the market, such as margarine's substituting for butter, and artificial
fibers' for cotton and wool, or due to loss or gain of foreign markets.
Given continuing wars and business cycles, a good part of the problem
for agriculture is adjusting itself to them, expanding just enough at
the right time and way, and then contracting afterwards.
It should be apparent that the measures outlined above can be
adapted to fit the need for expansion as well as contraction. They
surely can be used to check overexpansion due to new technology, or
bring about adjustments due to loss of markets. In spite of full awareness
of the hog-corn cycle for forty years, however, there is evidence
of very little headway in controlling it. Indeed, real success along any
of the lines just listed will call for a more vigorous and determined
effort than has thus far been made, except in the case of wartime expansions.
The first part of such an effort is over-all current analysis