I have just been concentrating upon what exponential growth can do
in a finite environment, upon a growth process which, as Coale reports
[11, p. 36], within 65 centuries and in the absence of environmental
limits, could generate "a solid sphere of live bodies expanding with a
radial velocity that, neglecting relativity, would equal the velocity of
light." Let me now recall that second process operative in our world
of shrinking space, a process to which man must respond even as
the ratio of suitably situated space to population declines. I refer
to that seemingly stochastic process which is concentrating an ever
larger fraction of the world's population within the confines of a
small number of megalopolises or human rabbit warrens. This process
accentuates the adverse externalities associated with population
growth and, as has been suggested, may produce unfavorable political
effects as well as frustrate the demand for living space which tends to
rise with income. But let me turn to solutions.
Curbing population growth could prove easy in modern nations,
given current contraceptive methods and knowledge thereof. It is necessary
only to alter the terms of trade between gross increments to the
population and alternative uses of the inputs involved. In essence, this
might entail holding each couple responsible for all or most costs, visible
and invisible, direct and indirect, of reproducing and rearing children,
in keeping with at least minimal standards prescribed by the
state. Should the number of births still be too large, excise taxes could
be imposed upon higher-order children and upon child-oriented products
and services, while if births were too few, these products and services
could be cheapened through use of subsidies.
Control of megalopolitanization and the redirection of urban growth
are achievable through use of taxation, penalties, and constraints. Initially,
however, much more study needs to be made of longitudinal and
cross-sectional relations between variation in city size and marginal
cost-benefit ratios under essentially comparable conditions.
As matters stand, the longer-run prospect is definitely Malthusian,
with man sitting on a demographic time bomb into which legislators,
and others, here and abroad, continue to shovel combustibles. Yet
there may be grounds for conditional optimism. Not only can economists
devote to the population question more attention than they gave it in the
past 80 years when they devoted only about 1-1.5 per cent of their articles
to population,1 but there are many more economists to do the job.
Today more economists are practicing than lived and died in the past
four thousand years, and their number is growing even faster than the
world's population.
'This estimate is based upon entries in the Index of Economic Journals, sponsored by
the American Economic Association.