By 1929, the output of corporate businesses was already almost twice
as large as the output of individual proprietorship and partnerships.
The gap has widened appreciably since then. Corporate profits have
therefore tended to increase faster than the incomes earned by proprietors,
who still remain very numerous in farming, retail trade, and the
professions. Fifty years ago the total income of proprietors was perhaps
two and a half times as large as the combined sum of corporate
profits and the compensation of corporate officers. By 1957 this corporate
aggregate exceeded by a fourth the income of all proprietors and
by two-thirds the income of proprietors outside of farming.
The great growth of corporations in recent decades has occurred preponderantly
in industries where the firm must operate on a large scale
to be efficient and therefore must assemble capital from many sources.
But a corporation whose stock is held publicly and widely has a life of
its own, apart from that of its owners, and will rarely distribute profits
at the same rate as they are being earned. While profits normally respond
quickly and sharply to a change in sales and production, the behavior
of dividends is tempered by business judgment. In practice,
dividends tend to move sluggishly and over a much narrower range than
profits. Corporations have therefore come to function increasingly as a
buffer between the fluctuations of production and the flow of income to
individuals. In earlier times the lag of dividends was largely a result of
the time-consuming character of corporate procedures. More recently,
the advantages of a stable dividend-especially its bearing on a firm's
financial reputation-have gained increasing recognition from business
managers. Meanwhile, modern trends of taxation have stimulated corporations
to rely more heavily on retained profits and less on new stock
issues for their equity funds, and this development in turn has facilitated
the pursuit of stable dividend policies. Thus the evolution of corporate
practice, as well as the growth of corporate enterprise itself,
has served to reduce the influence of a cyclical decline of production
and profits on the flow of income to individuals.
The expansion and the means of financing of governmental enterprise,
especially since the 1930's, have had a similar effect. The increasing
complexity of modern life, a larger concept of the proper function of
government, and the mounting requirements of national defense have resulted
in sharp increases of governmental spending. Fifty years ago the
combined expenditure of federal, state, and local governments was
about 7 per cent of the dollar volume of the nation's total output. Governmental
expenditures rose to 10 per cent of total output in 1929 and
to 26 per cent in 1957. This huge expansion of governmental enterprise
naturally led to increases in tax rates and to an energetic search for
new sources of revenue. In time, taxes came to be imposed on estates,