derstandings about what the other specialist was doing. Many people
cannot understand that others may be talking about altogether
different things when they use the same words.
I am not happy about the practice of calling any study just because
it deals with or employs a concept of the firm "economics" or "microeconomics.
" But we cannot issue licenses for the use of such terms
and, hence, must put up with their rather free use. My own prejudices
balk at designating organization theory as economics-but other people'
s prejudices are probably different from mine, and we gain little or
nothing from arguing about the correct scope of our field.
Now what conclusions from all our reviewing may we draw on the
conflicts between marginal analysis, behavioral theory, and managerial
theory of the firm? Fortunately, not much time is being wasted on descriptive
studies of a narrowly behaviorist kind, in the sense of recording
observed behavior without any prior theoretical design. Most
proponents of behavioral studies of the firm are too competent theorists
for that. As far as the proponents of managerial theories are concerned,
they have never claimed to be anything but marginalists, and
the behavior goals they have selected as worthy for incorporation into
behavior equations, along with the goal of making profits, were given a
differentiable form so that they could become part of marginal
analysis.17 Thus, instead of a heated contest between marginalism and
managerialism in the theory of the firm, a marriage between the two
has come about.
Not all marriages, these days, are permanent; divorces are frequent.
Whether this marriage will last or end in divorce will depend chiefly on
what offspring it will produce. If the match of the profit hypothesis
with the various managerial hypotheses proves fertile of sufficiently
interesting deductions, the prospects of a lasting marriage are good.
It is not easy to judge the future sterility or fertility of this marriage
between marginalism and managerialism, because most of us are
inclined to underrate the kinds of problem on which we have never