roles assigned to it and the criteria by which the profession believes
monetary policy should be guided. Then, the chief roles assigned monetary
policy were to promote price stability and to preserve the gold
standard; the chief criteria of monetary policy were the state of the
"money market," the extent of "speculation" and the movement of
gold. Today, primacy is assigned to the promotion of full employment,
with the prevention of inflation a continuing but definitely secondary
objective. And there is major disagreement about criteria of policy,
varyino from emphasis on money market conditions, interest rates, and
the quantity of money to the belief that the state of employment itself
should be the proximate criterion of policy.
I stress nonetheless the similarity between the views that prevailed in
the late 'twenties and those that prevail today because I fear that, now
as then, the pendulum may well have swung too far, that, now as then,
we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than it
can perform, in danger of asking it to accomplish tasks that it cannot
achieve, and, as a result, in danger of preventing it from making the
contribution that it is capable of making.
Unaccustomed as I am to denigrating the importance of money, I
therefore shall, as my first task, stress what monetary policy cannot do.
I shall then try to outline what it can do and how it can best make its
contribution, in the present state of our knowledge-or ignorance.
I. What Monetary Policy Cannot Do
From the infinite world of negation, I have selected two limitations
of monetary policy to discuss: (1) It cannot peg interest rates for more
than very limited periods; (2) It cannot peg the rate of unemployment
for more than very limited periods. I select these because the contrary
has been or is widely believed, because they correspond to the two main
unattainable tasks that are at all likely to be assigned to monetary policy,
and because essentially the same theoretical analysis covers both.
Pegging of Interest Rates
History has already persuaded many of you about the first limitation.
As noted earlier, the failure of cheap money policies was a major
source of the reaction against simple-minded Keynesianism. In the
United States, this reaction involved widespread recognition that the
wartime and postwar pegging of bond prices was a mistake, that the
abandonment of this policy was a desirable and inevitable step, and
that it hiad none of the disturbing and disastrous consequences that
were so freely predicted at the time.
The li'mitation derives from a much misunderstood feature of the relation
between money and interest rates. Let the Fed set out to keep