than had J. S. Mill, tile inference of A. M. Carr-Saunders [6] (and
earlier Henry George) that a population normally assumed optimum
size. Mill emphasized, as had Jeremy Bentham and others, the need
for contraception, a need increasingly stressed during the Malthusian
period [18]. Only a tremendous stimulus resulting in an improvement
of "signal character," such as had been produced in France by the
Revolution, could change men's habits, elevate their standards, and
reduce their natality, Mill observed (Principles, II, xi, 2); and J. B.
Clark (Essentials, Ch. 19) 59 years later expressed a somewhat
modified version of this view. Not until the 1950's, however, did H.
Leibenstein and R. Nelson incorporate a Mill-like view into growth
models entailing the displacement of populations from the Malthusian
equilibria in which they had been trapped.
The Malthusian period witnessed many improvements in both the
art of population projection and the quantity and quality of statistical
data, together with the instruments employed to analyze them. A
major objective was to eliminate distortions occasioned in crude measures
of fertility or mortality by differences or abnormalities in age,
sex, and marital composition. Gross and net reproduction rates came
into use toward the close of the period, some years after they had been
anticipated; they made it possible to determine the rate of increase per
generation in a population of stable age distribution, a model developed
by A. J. Lotka as early as 1911. The demographer could then
cope with changes in age composition associated with adjustment to
constant age-specific fertility and mortality rates, though not with unpredictable
variations in mortality, fertility, or sex composition [16,
Ch. 12]. Population forecasters therefore resorted to projections of
present populations based upon various sets of assumed age-specific
fertility and mortality rates. Recourse was had also to logistic curves
fitted to past populations, a method originated by Verhulst and rediscovered
by Raymond Pearl and L. J. Reed, who forecast a maximum
world population of about 2,646 million and a maximum American
population of about 197 million as of around A.D. 2100 [10].
II. A Time of Reconsideration: 1930-65
Opinion on population issues was homogeneous during the period
1800-1930. All but Marxian opinion, whether critical or affirmative of
Malthus's views, took his model as a point of departure. Not so in the
period 1930-65, or perhaps better, the period 1925-65. Voices were
many and discordant, and divers earlier views were rejeCted. Honored
in the breach was Jacob Viner's advice to this body (in 1938), that the
economic theorist "is the special custodian for society of the long view
in economic matters" (Am. Econ. Rev., March 1939, p. 9) as well as