futility of human effort, share the common determination, as economists
as well as citizens, so to mold our economic arrangements, through
appropriate combinations of individual initiative and collective control,
as not only to safeguard the meritorious accomplishments of the past,
but to eliminate current maladjustments of major significance and to
move forward to new horizons. Our professional discussions of economic
policy are the counterpart of the widespread concern with policy matters
voiced through innumerable channels in the community at large,
and they tend to reflect the dominant interests of economists in the
contemporary scene.

III

While it is a commonplace that public policy in economic affairs is
the result of the interaction of a great diversity of factors, discussions
of policy problems are all too frequently confined to the narrow limits,
more or less technically defined, of the particular issues immediately
under consideration. Not only are related economic elements of offsetting
character sometimes ignored, but non-economic considerations are
often deemed to be altogether irrelevant. The age in which we live is
one of specialization; and because of the enormous expansion of the
field of knowledge, specialization naturally prevails in the intellectual
sphere as well as in other aspects of our highly developed social arrangements.
Immense good has issued of course from the labors of experts
in restricted segments of the broad realm of science and thought.
Without intensive activity by specialists in narrowly limited spheres of
investigation, the sweep and rapidity of our progress to knowledge and
understanding would be seriously impaired. In our own field, resort to
specialized, detailed, and incisive analyses of economic conditions and
of the interplay of economic forces is clearly indispensable. But controlling
reliance upon sharply departmentalized results, both within
and between special fields of inquiry, has its serious drawbacks,
particularly in relation to the development of public policy. For the
latter purpose the most pressing need, aside from the assembly of
adequate data and their subjection to competent analysis, is for intelligent
and balanced synthesis of the numerous and often conflicting
factors involved. On the economic front, despite the constant pulling
and hauling of special groups for special advantage, the problem of
the effective functioning of the industrial system as a whole, particularly
from the standpoint of the optimum utilization of material and
human resources without serious interruption, has tended to constitute
since the great depression the dominant concern of economic policy;
and this concern, if it is to issue in fruitful social adjustments, calls for
integrated knowledge and integrated thinking.
