sumed, the following inferences can be suggested. We know that per
capita income is greater in sector B than in sector A; that, at best, the
per capita income differential between sectors A and B has been fairly
constant (e.g., in the United States) and has perhaps more often in-
creased; that the proportion of sector A in total numbers has dimin-
ished. Then, if we start with intrasector distribution of B more unequal
than for A, we would expect results suggested by either lines 8-10 or
18-20. In the former case, the range widens as the proportion of A drops
from 0.8 to 0.5, and then narrows. In the latter case, the range declines
beyond the point at which the proportion of A is 0.7. But in both cases,
the share of the 1st quintile declines, and fairly appreciably and con-
tinuously (see lines 8 and 18). The magnitude and continuity of the
decline are partly the result of the specific assumptions made; but one
would be justified in arguing that within the broad limits suggested by
the illustration, the assumption of greater inequality in the intrasector
distribution for sector B than for sector A, yields a downward trend
in the share of the lower-income groups. Yet we find no such trend in
the empirical evidence that we have. Can we assume that in the earlier
periods the internal distribution for sector B was not more unequal than
for sector A, despite the more recent indications that urban income dis-
tribution is more unequal than the rural?
There is, obviously, room for conjecture. It seems most plausible
to assume that in earlier periods of industrialization, even when the
nonagricultural population was still relatively small in the total, its in-
come distribution was more unequal than that of the agricultural popu-
lation. This would be particularly so during the periods when industri-
alization and urbanization were proceeding apace and the urban popula-
tion was being swelled, and fairly rapidly, by immigrants-either from
the country's agricultural areas or from abroad. Under these condi-
tions, the urban population would run the full gamut from low-income
positions of recent entrants to the economic peaks of the established
top-income groups. The urban income inequalities might be assumed to
be far wider than those for the agricultural population which was or-
ganized in relatively small individual enterprises (large-scale units were
rarer then than now).
If we grant the assumption of wider inequality of distribution in sec-
tor B, the shares of the lower-income brackets should have shown a
downward trend. Yet the earlier summary of empirical evidence indi-
cates that during the last 50 to 75 years there has been no widening in
income inequality in the developed countries but, on the contrary, some
narrowing within the last two to four decades. It follows that the intra-
sector distribution-either for sector A or for sector B-must have
shown sufficient narrowing of inequality to offset the increase called