economy within which the group's long-time interest must be achieved.
For purposes of simplicity I will discuss the matter from here on
merely in terms of the economist in the employ of a large industrial
company. The industrial economist ceases to be a theorist of abstraction
and becomes something approximating a laboratory scientist. If
his employers were intelligent and sincere in hiring him, they will
facilitate his access to the factual materials essential to making the
analyses needed in finding answers to the questions that confront the
business. If they respect the economist as they respect the chemists and
engineers they hire, they will even let him tell them what questions should
be asked. And at appropriate times they will let the economist know
actually the considerations and the reasoning that led them to make
important decisions of general policy or particular action. Only on such
knowledge can he compare their expectations of cause-and-result relations
with the sequences to be expected in accordance with the most
fully developed tools of analysis furnished by economic theory. Meanwhile
his attempts to use the tools in the robust surroundings of his
actual business laboratory will show him which tools are too fragile and
which have been designed without proper knowledge of the tasks to
be performed. Under such conditions, we might expect the industrial
economist to become a vigorous contributor to the basic science of
economics regarded as pragmatic generalization of realities, not as implicit
theorizing of definitions.
This leads me to another and perhaps somewhat tangential observation.
Such a decentralization of economic talent from the bureaus of
Washington to the headquarters offices of business corporations, cooperative
associations, industrial institutes, and labor unions should
make for the improvement of our profession at the same time that it
was elevating business administration. It is obvious-at least to members
of the American Economic Association-that there should be a
substantial number of carefully chosen and well-trained economists at
the seat of government, counseling the officials who make policy and
serving on the staffs of the bureaus that administer them. While this
position at the seat of government gives a commanding view of the
far reaches of a problem, it is also conducive in the economist's thinking
to the resort to ideal solutions somewhat outside the range of actual
business. These may take the form of subsidies which will permit
certain operations to continue even when they would not survive in the
commercial market. Such escapism may grow out of having recourse
to the taxing power and of learning to contemplate a permanently
unbalanced budget with equanimity and a managed-or mismanagedcurrency
with the thrill of adventure. It leads also to a certain looseness
of thinking among those who fancy an economic problem can
be solved by running away from the rigorous limitations imposed by