more indefensible to view the objective of social-economic policy in
terms of the amount and distribution of measurable impersonal goods
and services. Wealth and poverty are terribly important things, but
that view of their significance seems to me an absurd over-simplification.
Freedom itself, as a value per se, is far more important. In "economic"
life, in the ordinary empirical reference, the motivation of
competitive sport plays a role at least as great as the endeavor to
secure gratifications mechanically dependent on quantitative consumption.
Some business efficiency expert is said to have advised reforming
football by having all the men play on the same side, instead of half
pushing against the other half. The real problem centers, of course, in
the fact that activity has both characters; it is a game, but one in which
the most vital substantive goods, comfort and life itself, are stakes,
inseparably combined with victory and defeat and their baublesymbols.
The social problem is to make the best possible rules for this
complex and paradoxical game, which everyone is compelled to play.
And it must go on almost without interruption, and it is impossible to
play a game and discuss the rules at the same time. The intellectual
problem involved in rule-making is different in kind from that of play
itself, and neither-it is important to note-has much relation to
scientific technology, or means-end rationality; nor to our traditional
religious-ethical principle of charity. For, when charity comes into a
game, the game goes out; though in relation to the other aspect of the
process, the production and distribution of goods considered intrinsically
useful, it does have a part to play. I may suggest that the ethic really
believed in and reasonably practiced by the modern man centers in
sportsmanship, and the related principle of workmanship.
Even with much and costly social action, there can be no very close
approximation to the theoretical perfect market, particularly in one
important area, the labor market. This fact does not at all justify most
of the action being taken in that field, by unions or by government; in
general, the argument against price control and other interference is
made stronger, not weaker, by the "imperfect competition" which is
used as a defense for it. And the action we see is designed to make the
market still more imperfect, and to benefit a select stratum already
comparatively well off, at the expense of their weaker brethren. The
effects cannot be traced and measured in detail, but it is a safe "principle"
that in a power contest the weakest get the worst of it. The chief
"mechanical" defects in the market system arise less out of "frictions"
than out of speculative situations. When in order to act rationally each
must first know or guess at what everyone else will do, the result is
complicated cyclical tendencies; in particular, speculation in the future
value of money gives rise to "the business cycle," sometimes an actual