political-economic issue than the distribution of rents or of the income
from private property in general.

It is fortunate that such rigidity and the necessity for such perfection
do not exist. Since they do not, the potentiality exists for the evolutionary
solution of the grave and complex question of whether and to
what degree we shall have to depend upon new and old forms of competition,
supported by antitrust legislation and enforcement, in comparison
with the degree to which we must depend upon the development
of governmental agencies for dealing with price and wage policies
in industries in which competition can no longer be depended upon for
their regulation.

The very fact that the managements of business corporations and the
managements of labor unions have interests which are not identical with
those of their stockholders on the one hand or of the rank and file membership
of the unions on the other, affords an alternative channel of
development. Both types of management may not be so adamant in the
pursuit of the short-run interests of their constituencies as in the past
and there is nowadays greater vulnerability to considerations of public
relations. Consequently the consumer interest might be accorded some
of the protection which it formerly received from competition.
It may well be that the system which I have called the "organizational
economy" remains at least within gun-shot of what J. M. Clark
designated as "workable competition." Certainly either term is esthetically
superior to some such monstrosity as: "Competition, possessing
tremendous survival value, always present somewhere and present
almost everywhere in some degree, curn oligopoly or anyhow price
leadership, often incomplete and/or intermittent, together with collective
bargaining, in which economic power, always liable to become
political, conceivably may countervail just enough but just as likely
may countervail too little or too much, perhaps followed by governmental
intervention and/or control." Such a monstrosity might, however,
be more descriptive of our actual economic system than calling
it by a shorter name.

Of far greater importance than what we call our economic system is
the fact that, whatever the logical difficulties in analyzing it and in
charcterizing it, this organizational economy has, up to now, served
us far better both in terms of goods produced and in terms of human
liberties preserved than has any other system, in any other country. In
any event, I hope and believe we will understand it better after we have
read the Proceedings of these meetings.
