The American Economic Review 
VOLUME XL MARCH, 1950 NUMBER ONE 
THE ECONOMIC WAY OF THINKING* 
By HOWARD S. ELLIS 
The proposition to which I should like to draw attention is not novel. 
But in these days of physical planning and social priorities, it may not 
be amiss to recall something ancient, if it is something relevant. And 
that is that economic analysis rests fundamentally upon individual 
choice; and where the individual cannot choose, economics does not 
exist. Economics is concerned with the application of scarce resources to 
unlimited wants. Costs, utility or indifference calculations, saving and 
consuming, investing and hoarding, altering productive proportions, 
introducing new combinations-in all the manifold aspects of the eco- 
nomic problem, the key phenomenon is choice. 
Choices in these matters can be made collectively. But there is cer- 
tainly a narrower and very significant sense in which choice is only in- 
dividual; and it is this kind of choice which economics, in contrast to 
ethics and politics, takes for its subject matter. A moral law, enforced 
by public censure or approval, limits the choice of individuals. A politi- 
cal decision or law, even in a democracy except in the rare case of 
unanimity, also limits individual choice. But an economic generalization 
describes individual choice and its results. This does not mean that there 
should be neither moral nor political law; it merely asserts the contrast 
between moral and political on the one hand and economic on the other. 
To the determinist in general or in social philosophy, a contrast based 
on free will would, of course, be inadmissible. But I am content to speak 
in commonsense terms. There is significance-and indeed very deep 
significance-in the statement that the moral injunction to speak the 
truth limits the freedom of the individual to say whatever he chooses, 
even though he voluntarily accepts the principle as categoric. In political 
matters a tax law, though resting upon free political choice in a parlia- 
*Presidential address delivered at the Sixty-second Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, New York City, December 28, 1949. 
This content downloaded from 73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 