for a parcel of real estate that will give the lessee the same incentive to
take care of the property that an owner would have.3
3. The individual labor bargain. If what is profitable is to be in
accord with the public interest, no one should ever be able to do any-
thing that imposes any cost on the community beyond the cost he him-
self has to bear. But there have been various circumstances under which
an individual could do something without paying the full cost. It has
frequently been said of such a situation that the individual had to pay
only the money cost, not the human cost. Thus the difficulty with the
kind of bargain likely to be reached between an individual employee
and an individual employer in the absence of protective labor legisla-
tion has often been thought of in terms of this distinction. But "human
cost" is a vague, subjective concept. The costs an employer or other
individual avoids ought to be more definitely identified. They commonly
can be more definitely identified by a form of social accounting pro-
posed by J. M. Clark. As he puts it-and his point is quite independent
of any monopsony element in the bargaining-the cost of living is a
kind of overhead cost to the labororer, but the labor contract makes
wages a direct cost to the employer.4 Indeed the labor contract is a
species of short-term lease. It is similar to a real-property lease in that
it gives the lessee (the employer in this case) an inadequate incentive
to take reasonable care of the worker's health and safety. Further, under
such a short-term lease the employer can be expected to avoid the kind
of responsibility for a worker's maintenance when business is slack and
when the worker is superannuated or technologically unemployed that
he would have to assume if the worker were his property.
4. De facto torts. The distinction between money cost and human
cost has been applied also to various other circumstances under which
an individual could do something without paying the full cost. And in
general, social cost accounting makes possible a more definite identifica-
tion of the costs he has avoided. An important class of such avoided
costs involve what I have elsewhere analyzed as de facto torts, situa-
tions in which an individual inflicts damage on another person or
another person's property or exposes another person's life or limbs to
danger, without that other person's having a reasonably adequate
remedy at law.5 There have been many cases of this sort, among them
cases involving unsafe buildings and building installations, unsanitary