to encourage opportunities of employment for all who are willing
and able to work, and to promote employment, production, and
purchasing power. In form the law deals primarily with one aspect of
economic life, employment, but the different facets of economic activity
are so interrelated that a successful policy assuring continuous
employment would require and assure stability of production, prices,
and other phases of life as well. The statute is couched in negotiated
language, representing compromises between different points of view.
Perhaps this should make it easier for its administrators to command
broad support. It is beyond doubt that the Act provides a foundation
for co6rdinated national economic policy.
It requires the President to transmit to Congress every year at the
opening of the session, an economic report covering in substance all
important phases of the nation's economic life, together with a program
of action. In addition, the President may from time to time transmit
supplementary reports.
The Act sets up a Council of Economic Advisers to assist the President
in the formulation of his economic reports. It also creates a Joint
Committee of Congress to receive these reports and to make studies of
its own, and on this basis to transmit to the Senate and House of Representatives
its own reports containing its findings and recommendations.
This Act contains, in embryo, what is necessary to start the government
on a road to more effective action. It recognizes the unity of the
problems handled by the different departments and agencies, it gives the
President the kind of help and support that he requires and is entitled to
in the discharge of his great responsibilities, and it improves the procedure
for co6peration between the executive and the legislative branches of
government. A stronger and more formal link must be forged in the near
future, but the present law represents a step in the right direction.
This statute has been enacted so recently and the Economic Council
has been constituted for so short a time that it is too early to judge of its
effectiveness in actual operation. Its possibilities, however, are far reaching;
it needs the support of all citizens, and more particularly of this
Association, whose former president has been appointed as chairman of
the Council. The country cannot afford to have this promising start become
lost in the mazes of official red tape, or in conflicts for power
among agencies. It must become the beacon light leading toward a new
and more adequate machinery of government in a democracy.
The Council is at present in the experimental stage. On how it is developed
and how much importance it gains in shaping the country's
economic policy will depend whether it will signalize a momentous step
forward in the democratic process or merely the emergence of another
in a long series of agencies issuing reports.