minds as the depression stretched out. In increasing numbers citizens in
all walks of life came around to the view that mass unemployment was
intolerable under modern conditions and that the federal government
has a continuing responsibility to foster competitive enterprise, to prevent
or moderate general economic declines, and to promote a high and
rising level of employment and production. This new philosophy of intervention
was articulated by the Congress in the Employment Act of 1946,
which solemnly expressed what had by then become a national consensus.
In recent times, therefore, the business cycle has no longer run a
free course and this fact has figured prominently in the plans of businessmen
as well as consumers. During the 1930's, when the objectives
of social reform and economic recovery were sometimes badly confused,
many investors suspected that contracyclical policies would result in
narrowing the scope of private enterprise and reducing the profitability
of investment. These fears diminished after the war as the government
showed more understanding of the need to foster a mood of confidence
so that enterprise, innovation, and investment may flourish. In investing
circles, as elsewhere, the general expectation of the postwar period
has been that the government would move with some vigor to check
any recession that developed, that its actions would by and large contribute
to this objective, and that they would do so in a manner that is
broadly consistent with our national traditions. This expectation gradually
became stronger and it has played a significant role in extending
the horizons of business thinking about the markets and opportunities
of the future. The upsurge of population, the eagerness of consumers
to live better, the resurgence of Western Europe, the revolutionary discoveries
of science, and the steady flow of new products, new materials,
and new processes have added impetus to the willingness of investors
to expend huge sums of capital on research and on the improvement
and expansion of industrial plant and equipment. Some of these influences
have also been effective in augmenting public investment. The
fundamental trend of investment has therefore been decidedly upward.
The private part of investment has continued to move cyclically; but
it is now a smaller fraction of total national output and it has displayed
a capacity to rebound energetically from the setbacks that come during
recessions.
The specific measures adopted by the government in dealing with the
recessions of the postwar period have varied from one case to the next.
In all of them, monetary, fiscal, and housekeeping policies played some
part, with agricultural price-support programs assuming special prominence
in one recession, tax reductions in another, and increases of
public expenditure in still another. Taking a long view, the most nearly
consistent part of contracyclical policy has been in the monetary