the term Ideology or Ideological Bias for this-real or supposedstate
of things alone, and our problem is to ascertain the extent to
which ideological bias is or has been a factor in the development of
what-conceivably-it might be a misnomer to call scientific economics.

In recognizing the ideological element it is possible to go to very
different lengths. There are a few writers who have in fact denied that
there is such a thing in economics as accumulation of a stock of
"correctly" observed facts and "true" propositions. But equally small
is the minority who would deny the influence of ideological bias entirely.
The majority of economists stand between these extremes: they
are ready enough to admit its presence though, like Marx, they find
it only in others and never in themselves; but they do not admit that
it is an inescapable curse and that it vitiates economics to its core.
It is precisely this intermediate position that raises our problem. For
ideologies are not simply lies; they are truthful statements about what
a man thinks he sees. Just as the medieval knight saw himself as he
wished to see himself and just as the modern bureaucrat does the
same and just as both failed and fail to see whatever may be adduced
against their seeing themselves as the defenders of the weak and
innocent and the sponsors of the Common Good, so every other social
group develops a protective ideology which is nothing if not sincere.
Ex hypothesi we are not aware of our rationalizations-how then is it
possible to recognize and to guard against them?
But let me repeat before I go on: I am speaking of science which is
technique that turns out the results which, together with value judgments
or preferences, produce recommendations, either individual ones
or systems of them-such as the systems of mercantilism, liberalism
and so on. I am not speaking of these value judgments and these
recommendations themselves. I fully agree with those who maintain
that judgments about ultimate values-about the Common Good, for
instance-are beyond the scientist's range except as objects of historical
study, that they are ideologies by nature and that the concept
of scientific progress can be applied to them only so far as the means
may be perfected that are to implement them. I share the conviction
that there is no sense in saying that the world of ideas of bourgeois
liberalism is "superior" in any relevant sense to the world of ideas of
the middle ages, or the world of ideas of socialism to that of bourgeois
liberalism. Actually, I further believe that there is no reason other than
personal preference for saying that more wisdom or knowledge goes
into our policies than went into those of the Tudors or Stuarts or, for
that matter, into Charlemagne's.