free economic institutions in public policy-increasing resort to legislative
and bureaucratic interference and control, the growth of pressure
groups employing both political and "direct" action to get what they
want, and with all this the debasement of the state itself, completely
in much of the European world, from free forms to ruthless despotism.
It is surely legitimate to ask whether there is some connection between
the movement of economic thinking and that of political
change.
Now all thinking involves "principles" in some sense, at least the
formation of concepts and fitting of concrete data to concepts through
propositions. Surveying the quality of economic thinking in matters
of policy which seemingly tends to win out, one faces the unpleasant
question whether, if people will not think more or less correctly, it is
good for them to think at all. Perhaps it might be better to go back
to the good old days when men believed and did what they were told
by hoary tradition and constituted authority. For so the great mass
always lived, prior to the advent of our historically unique West
European civilization a couple of centuries ago. Perhaps the "principle"
of authoritarian dictatorship is right after all-or inevitable, which
for practical purposes comes to the same thing-as large groups even
in this country insist and preach. And I do not mean only the Communist
Party and its sympathizers; there are others, far more numerous,
who are among its most vociferous opponents. For one totalitarian
party will naturally hate another with different leaders and slogans
far worse than they will hate those who stand for freedom.
My doubts and discouragement-for there is no reason to avoid
such words, since I propose here to place truth ahead of other valuesare
not new. It has long been my habit to mention to classes the
sinister import of such intellectual phenomena as protectionism in
foreign economnic policy; and the perpetual popular demand for making
capital cheap by manufacturing money; and for creating a demand
for labor by enforcing all sorts of inefficiency, waste and even destruction.
The free-traders, as has been said, win the debates but the protectionists
win the elections; and it makes little difference in our policy
which party wins, the avowed protectionists or the professed freetraders.
Inflation is of course to be brought on as a more pleasant
alternative to taxation, and then suppressed by law and police action.
Try to get people to see that if the value of money has been depreciated
by, say, forty-five per cent, any price, charge, or tax that has not
risen in money terms by over eighty per cent has actually been reduced.
If the rulers of democracy, the demos, will not heed simple arithmetic,
what is the use in talking and writing about problems which really
are problems?--not to mention developing higher mathematical for-