sharply for a spell while the farm assets percentage turned upward.
They are now declining together again.

Not included in productive assets in the foregoing are the quickturnover
or circulating types of capital goods-on the farm, the commercial
fertilizer and lime, the sprays, the feed for livestock, the fuel
and oil used with the tractors, and the like. Much of the feed used by
dairy and poultry farmers is today a commercial product in part. The
counterparts of these in the nonfarm sector are the raw materials of
industry, the fuel and power used, the merchandise purchased by wholesalers
and retailers, and the like. Any comparison of these magnitudes
for the farm and nonfarm sectors must take account of the rate of turnover,
or the time period between purchase of the supplies and raw materials
and the sale of the final product. This would be too large a task
of estimation for this occasion. It can be pointed out, however, that
these types of capital goods are playing a larger and larger role in agriculture.
They were a half larger in 1950 than in 1940 after adjusting
for the rise in prices.

Gross and Net National Product

The measures which combine labor force with other productive
agents are of course either total inputs or total outputs. The total input
measure is dangerous to use because only arbitrary values can be
assigned to family labor and some of the other input factors. Total output
of course includes the effect of any changes in the input-output function
because of changes in technology, managerial skill, and the like.
Nevertheless, it is the best one to use. In Table III are the estimates of
farm gross national product and total gross national product (GNP) in
terms of current dollars with the accompanying percentages, and parallel
data for farm and national net product. The year 1929 is included
along with 1930 because 1930 was a depression year. A gross product
summation for a particular industry must be in terms of the value added
by that industry. Otherwise the separate industry totals cannot be combined
without a large amount of double and even triple counting. Still,
the term "gross" applied to the product of a particular industry needs
to be clearly understood as differing from the net product for that industry
only in that no deductions have been made for capital consumption,
depreciation, and the like. Agriculture's percentages of the national
total are slightly lower in terms of net than of gross product
because of agriculture's larger use of capital goods especially from 1940
on, and hence larger capital consumption. Except for this, the series
for gross and for net product run in close parallel, and the gross product
will serve our purpose best.

In Chart I, the three series of agriculture's share which we have been
exploring, the share in the labor force, the share in tangible assets used