Treasury is engaged in refunding operations, and the main enmphasis
has to be placed on providing an adequate security market. It needs to
be emphasized therefore that, though we may have been making some
progress recently, we shall be facing quite a different set of circumstances
when, as now seems most probable, the Treasury begins again to
incur substantial deficits. Shall we then be forced back into the frozen
pattern of rates, and shall we find ourselves again providing automatic
access by the banks (and others) to central bank reserves? Though we
did last year unpeg the long-term rate by the Treasury-Federal Reserve
accord, we did it largely by converting the long-term marketable debt
into non-marketable debt.'9 It remains to be seen what we shall find
ourselves doing once we get into substantial deficit financing. This is
what I meant earlier by the need for a wider coordination of policies.
The size of the budget and of the deficits depends upon Executive and
Congressional action.
VII
What seems certain is that we need a more rounded monetary-fiscal
policy, in which each part plays its proper role. The experience of other
countries as well as our own has indicated that fiscal policy by itself is
by no nmeans the cure-all that in the first flush of enthusiasm it was
thought to be. For one thing it seems highly improbable that the Congress,
in any country, would ever accord as great a degree of discretion
and flexibility-or could possibly-as in the monetary field. Through
the use of an increasingly progressive individual income tax and the
corporate income tax, we have achieved a substantial degree of built-in
flexibility on the revenue side of the budget; perhaps what we most
need now is a broader and more flexible use of regressive taxes (in the
form of indirect taxation) if we really want to use taxation contracyclically.
Since the war, we have, up to now, avoided deficits, and in
the earlier years have even had surpluses. We have moderately reduced
the federal debt, though this was partly due to the fact that we had
previotusly overborrowed for war purposes. But these achievements,
noteworthy though they are in the circumstances, have been due
mainly to the retention of taxation at virtually its wartime level and,
since Korea, to an increase in the tax burden by some fifteen billion
dollars. The level of expenditures has remained high and intractable,
"Or rather, into convertible debt, giving an option of converting the 23/4 per cent nonmarketable
bond into a marketable 1?2 per cent five-year note; a policy which I feel  may cause us added difficulties, if this should become the chief new technique for tapping  long-term funds. In my view, to get true sensitivity through moderate changes in interest  rates, we sllal need particularly to increase our intermediate and long-term marketable  debt relative to the short-term debt.