yards, bridges, and harbors wrecked, and the cities in ruin. Structures,
equipment and inventories were all heaps of rubble. Not so visible, yet
large, was the toll from the wartime depletion of the physical plant
that escaped destruction by bombs. Economists were called upon to
assess the implications of these wartime losses for recovery. In retrospect,
it is clear that they overestimated the prospective retarding
effects of these losses. Having had a small hand in this effort, I have
had a special reason for looking back and wondering why the judgments
that we formed soon after the war proved to be so far from the
mark. The explanation that now is clear is that we gave altogether too
much weight to nonhuman capital in making these assessments. We fell
into this error, I am convinced, because we did not have a concept of all
capital and, therefore, failed to take account of human capital and
the important part that it plays in production in a modern economy.
Let me close this section with a comment on poor countries, for
which there are virtually no solid estimates. I have been impressed by
repeatedly expressed judgments, especially by those who have a responsibility
in making capital available to poor countries, about the
low rate at which these countries can absorb additional capital. New
capital from outside can be put to good use, it is said, only when it
is added "slowly and gradually." But this experience is at variance
with the widely held impression that countries are poor fundamentally
because they are starved for capital and that additional capital is truly
the key to their more rapid economic growth. The reconciliation is
again, I believe, to be found in emphasis on particular forms of capital.
The new capital available to these countries from outside as a rule
goes into the formation of structures, equipment and sometimes also
into inventories. But it is generally not available for additional investment
in man. Consequently, human capabilities do not stay abreast of
physical capital, and they do become limiting factors in economic
growth. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the absorption
rate of capital to augment only particular nonhuman resources is
necessarily low. The Horvat [8] formulation of the optimum rate of
investment which treats knowledge and skill as a critical investment
variable in determining the rate of economic growth is both relevant
and important.
III. Scope and Substance of These Investments
What are human investments? Can they be distinguished from consumption?
Is it at all feasible to identify and measure them? What do
they contribute to income? Granted that they seem amorphous compared
to brick and mortar, and hard to get at compared to the investment
accounts of corporations, they assuredly are not a fragment;