the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860 between Great Britain and
France, which brought a radical reversal from high protection to something
near free trade in France, and following the Franco-British accord
a number of commercial treaties which substantially reduced tariffs
all over Western and Central Europe. The impact of the free trade
movement was not confined to commercial policy and tariffs. Shipping
policy, which was extremely restrictive everywhere in the early nineteenth
century, was radically liberalized, first in Great Britain as early
as the 1830's and later in other countries. Furthermore, the introduction
of the "open door" policy in the British crown colonies and in others
was a major step towards the liberalization of world trade.
As far as tariff policy is concerned, the movement towards freer
trade came to an end in the last years of the 1870's. The two major
factors that caused the reversal of liberal commercial policy, first in
Germany (1878) and a little later in France and elsewhere, were the
accelerated influx of agricultural products from overseas countriesUnited
States, Canada, Argentina, Australia-and the impact of the
severe depressions of the 1870's and 1890's. But although import
tariffs in many countries showed a definite tendency to go higher
during the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the first decade
of the twentieth century, the volume of world trade rose rapidly
throughout the whole period up to WVorld War I. From about 1895 the
rate of growth was indeed substantially higher than during the preceding
two, and possibly three, decades.
A number of factors account for the growth of trade in the face of
rising tariffs. The technological revolution in production and transportation
continued, of course, without let-up. However this factor
alone might not have been sufficient to support the growth of world
trade as is shown by the development during the next period, namely
the interwar years during which world trade did not show much growth,
although one could hardly say that technological progress had slowed
down.
The flow of capital and especially of labor from Europe to the
Western Hemisphere and a few other areas continuied at a rapid and
increasing rate until 1914, after which it slowed down sharply. Moreover,
while tariffs went higher after 1878, they were on the whole still
moderate compared with those prevailing after World War I and, what is
equally important, much more stable. Furthermore, the international
payments mechanism improved with the adoption of the gold standard
by many countries in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. International
clearing of balances aided by the easy flow of short-term credit
through London and other financial centers in Western Europe and elsewhere
promoted multilateral trade around the globe. Payment restrictions