Furthermore, when the organization and operation of the social order
are viewed in the large, there is considerable kinship between the
underlying objectives of economists, sociologists, political scientists, and
students of the law. All are devoted to acquiring knowledge and insight
concerning human relationships as they develop within the framework
of organized society, with a view, in part at least, to advancing the
general welfare asi reflected from time to time in the unfolding aspirations
of the community. Each group deals with distinctive aspects of
social process, and each relies upon special expedients and techniques;
but the results of their explorations are part of a closely interrelated
whole. When these results are translated into institutional arrangements
through policy measures, those charged with responsibility for
the adoption of such measures cannot escape resort to coordination,
and they are as greatly in need of informed guidance in this aspect of
their labors as in having made available to them adequate and soundly
interpreted basic data in each distinctive sphere. This need of skilled
and disinterested coordination is all the more urgent because scientific
methods and scientific results can at best be only crudely approximated
in the field of social relations. Means and ends and the values conditioning
them are in process of constant flux; relevant data are always
less than complete or current; human beings display vigorous opposition
to controlled experimentation; the range of predictability is
sharply restricted; the pertinent variables are so extensive as to result
inevitably in wide differences with respect to diagnoses and cures; and
consideration must be accorded to ultrarational or even irrational
factors as well as to those assumed to be grounded in reason. It is in
such circumstances that legal arrangements in the field of economic
policy are evolved.
IV
Public control of economic policy is predominantly crystallized into
law. Aside from the ultimate control assumed to be exercised by the
coinsuming public in a free market economy, there are, of course,
numerous informal public controls, consciously applied for the most
part, unless condemned by law, through the great variety of voluntary
associations into which our society is organized. The development of
a spirit of private restraint and a sense of public responsibility on the
part of major economic interests, whether acting independently or
through such associations, might well serve to minimize the need of
government intervention. But neither reliance upon automatic processes
nor the beneficence of voluntary action has proved to be an adequate
instrument for the elimination of specific economic abuses or the
achievement oif constructive economic purposes. In these circumstances