To speak of developing countries in the aggregate-or, what comes
to much the same thing, of a "typical" or "representative" underdeveloped
country-is, of course, a bold abstraction from which purists
will recoil in horror. The less developed countries are a much more
heterogeneous group than the industrial countries. Amnong them there
are semideveloped and wholly undeveloped countries; tropical and
temperate zone agricultural countries; petroleum, mining, and agricultural
product exporters; many pursue inflationary policies of varying
degrees of severity, others are more disciplined; a few have convertible
currencies but the majority suffer from overvalued currencies and their
trade is restricted and distorted by controls and multiple currency
practices of varying impenetrability.
In view of this great diversity of basic structures and policies, it is
not surprising that the trade and growth performance of the less developed
countries is very widely scattered. To search for systematic
connections between the latter-performance-and the former-basic
structures and policies-would be a challenging task but cannot be undertaken
in one lecture. It would seem possible, however, to draw some
useful conclusions from the over-all picture.
The most important fact is that the volume of trade of the less developed
countries has grown and is growing at a substantial rate. The
more rapid growth of the volume of imports than that of exports reflects
the fact that these countries have been able to attract capital and
have received substantial aid from the industrial countries.
This on the whole favorable picture is not changed by the fact that
trade of, and between, the industrial countries has grown faster. The
more rapid growth of the trade of industrial countries is not a new
phenomenon. Even before 1914 it has often been observed, especially
by free trade economists with obvious satisfaction, that "the industrial
countries are their own best customers." But during the Great Depression
trade in manufactured products (which can be taken as a rough
index of trade of developed countries) contracted more sharply than
the volume of trade in primary products.
There are, however, good reasons to believe, as Professor Samuelson
recently reminded us [17, p. 48], that lower total volume of trade
between the developed and underdeveloped countries may bring more
material benefits and consumer satisfaction to both partners than the
larger volume of trade between the developed countries. The reason is
that the intramarginal cost differences underlying the trade of manufactures
between industrial countries are probably much smaller than
those on which the trade between industrial countries and the exporters
of primary products is based.'8