exponents approximates unity, fairly clearly suggests that there are
laws of production which can be approximated by inductive studies
and that we are at least approaching them.
And yet it is proper to chronicle the fact that we have obtained
some negative results. One persistent area of difficulty in these last
months has been the Massachusetts time series. We tried to improve
on Professor Cobb's series of capital and product with the result that
the more we refined the basic series, the more nonsensical the results
became. We are still working on this problem, but at the moment we
certainly do not see the light. Secondly, it is disconcerting to observe
that if we shorten our time periods by dropping off a number of terminal
years, we appreciably alter our results. We observed this fact earlier,
as did Professor Williams in New Zealand, but this paradox has been
most manifest when we omit the war years from 1916 on, in our
United States time series. Finally, we have attempted various interspatial
studies in which we use individual states as separate observations.
We have personally had no success with these attempts. The
most ambitious study of this latter nature has, however, been made by
my friend and former associate, Ernest Olson, and will be presented to
this Association later in these meetings. I do not wish to anticipate the
results of his paper, but I think it is proper to say that Mr. Olson has
been able to develop a formula which makes differences between countries
in their real national income a mathematical function of (1) the
total energy used, (2) the numbers of the working population, (3) the
quantity of livestock reduced to comparable units, and (4) the amount
of land-and he has derived exponents which indicate the comparative
importance of each. There is still much to be done in this direction and
some hard puzzles remain to be solved, but Mr. Olson's comparative
success offers us some hope that we may not face a completely blank
wall in working with this third method for deriving the laws of production.

Finally, I should like to point out that in the case of the United
States, we were compelled because of lack of capital figures, to stop with
1922 in our time series and with 1919 in our cross-section studies. We
have, therefore, not been able to cover the very perplexing period of
1920-40. I am doubtful for two reasons whether we can develop a
satisfactory production function for the United States during this
period: (a) In spite of the excellent work of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, we still lack adequate data for this period on the
capital available for use; and (b) there was wide variation between the
decades in the degree to which the available capital was actually used.
During the 'twenties, capital was quite fully employed, but during the