Before going on to those recent developments, let us look back once
more at the interwar period. As it recedes into the past and we gain
perspective, it becomes increasingly clear, it seems to me, that the interwar
or two-war period in general and the Great Depression in particular
were in many important respects a singular historical phenomenon.
Let me become more concrete. I have already mentioned that the
exceptional severity and length of the Great Depression were due to
special circumstances, institutional weaknesses, and incredibly inept
and timid policies on the national and international level. This has been
misunderstood by the Marxians and Keynesians. The doctrine of
secular stagnation, the widely held expectation that World War II
would soon be followed by a deep depression-an expectation which
was still entertained by many when the second and even when the third
postwar recession came around-all these misjudgments as well as the
theory of the stubborn dollar shortage and the low elasticity of international
demand stem largely, if not wholly, from the misinterpretations
of the depressed 1930's as a more or less regular business cycle
downswing. A period of singular catastrophes plays havoc with trend
extrapolations, and many an analysis has come to grief. Examples in
the domestic field are the numerous estimates of saving propensities
and investment opportunities for the postwar years on the basis of interwar
experience and figures. Formidable difficulties arise for another
type of analysis-namely that which assumes the existence of some
sort of supercycle, be it Kondratieff or the now much more popular
Kuznets cycle. It is difficult to see how an endogenous mechanism producing
such swings or cycles could fail to be completely disrupted by
the elemental forces of a world war or the Great Depression.7 In the
international field, the famous conjecture that the terms of trade have
a secular tendency to deteriorate either for the less developed countries
or for primary producers is to a large extent the consequence of not
recognizing the interwar period with its two very sharp price declinesin
1920-21 and 1929-33-as a singular event. In the light of later developments,
this conjecture has lost its statistical support entirely.8 We
shall encounter other cases of analyses that have gone astray for the
same reason.