shall represent, with approximate accuracy, the real commercial success
of the undertaking. (4) The operations must be of such a kind
that their union under one all-extensive Government monopoly will lead
to great advantage and economy [1, pp. 355, 279, 338]. On what is
this garbled descriptioin of a municipal water system based?-mature
introspection, of course.
Jevons is equally devoted to the a priori method when he discusses
public regulation. The "Principles of Industrial Legislation" are illustrated
first with the problem posed by a dangerous machine. Neither
worker nor employer, Jevons says, generally displays due concern for
the dangers that lurk in the unfenced machine.
But there remains one other mode of solving the question which is as
simple as it is effective. The law may command that dangerous machinery
shall be fenced, and the executive government may appoint inspectors to
go round and prosecute such owners as disobey the law [2, p. 4].
Several aspects of Jevons' position are instructive. There is no showing
of evidence on the failure of employers and employees to curb
dangerous machinery. There is no showing of evidence that direct controls
are simple and effective. Direct controls surely were not effective
in factories too small to catch the inspector's eyes, and it is a completely
open question whether they were effective elsewhere. And
finally, Jevons does not conceive of the possible role of the price system
in supplementing, if not replacing, direct inspection by a law making
employers responsible for accidents.'5
But let us recall who jevons was; he was the economist whose supreme
genius lay in his demand for empirical determination of theoretical
relationships and his immense resourcefulness in making such determinations.
This powerful instinct for empirical evidence spilled over
into a proposal that wherever possible new policies should first be tried
out at the local governmental level: "we cannot," he said, "really plan
out social reforms upon theoretical grounds."'" But, possible or not, he
really so planned out his reformns.
We may learn how a theorist coped with the problem by turning to
my second economist, Pigou. In Wealth and Welfare [8] he recited
four reasons for distrusting the ability of legislatures to control mo-
5 It should be a source of morbid instruction to us, that immediately after laying down
this dogmatic rule on how to treat with dangerous machinery, Jevons denounces those  who view the economist as a "presumptuous theorist, who is continually laying down hard-  and-fast rules for the conduct of other people" [2, p. 81.
16 "Experimental Legislation and the Drink Traffic," The Contemporary Review, 37,  1880, 192 (reprinted in Methods of Social Reform, p. 275). He did not see the potentiali-  ties of empirical study in the absence of formal experiment, however, and denied the  feasibility of a statistical approach ("Experimental Legislation," pp. 184-85).