even declines. Even disregarding other factors that will be noted in the
next section, no firm conclusion as to trends of upper-income shares
can be derived from the bare model discussed. Search for further data
might yield evidence that would permit a reasonably rough but determinate
conclusion; but I have no such evidence at hand.
The Shift from Agricultural to Nonagricultural Sectors
What about the trend toward greater inequality due to the shift
from the agricultural to the nonagricultural sectors? In view of the importance
of industrialization and urbanization in the process of economic
growth, their implications for trends in the income distribution
should be explored-even though we have neither the necessary data
nor a reasonably complete theoretical model.
The implications can be brought out most clearly with the help of a
numerical illustration (see Table I). In this illustration we deal with
two sectors: agriculture (A) and all others (B). For each sector we
assume percentage distributions of total sector income among sector
deciles: one distribution (E) is of moderate inequality, with the shares
starting at 5.5 per cent for the lowest decile and rising 1 percentage
point from decile to decile to reach 14.5 per cent for the top decile; the
other distribution (U) is much more unequal, the shares starting at 1
per cent for the lowest decile, and rising 2 percentage points from decile
to decile to reach 19 per cent for the top decile. We assign per capita
incomes to each sector: 50 units to A and 100 units to B in case I (lines
1-10 in the illustration); 50 to A and 200 to B in case II (lines 11-20).
Finally, we allow the proportion of the numbers in sector A in the total
number to decline from 0.8 to 0.2.
The numerical illustration is only a partial summary of the calculations,
showing the shares of the lowest and highest quintiles in the income
distribution for the total population under different assumptions.6
The basic assumptions used throughout are that the per capita income
of sector B (nonagricultural) is always higher than that of sector A;
that the proportion of sector A in the total number declines; and that
the inequality of the income distribution within sector A may be as
wide as that within sector B but not wider. With the assumptions con-
'The underlying calculations are quite simple. For each case we distinguish 20 cells within
the total distribution-sets of ten deciles for each sector. For each cell we compute the
percentage shares of both number and income in the number and income of total population,
and hence also the relative per capita income of each cell. The cells are then arrayed
in increasing order of their relative per capita income and cumulated. In the resulting  cumulative distributions of number and countrywide income we establish, by arithmetic
interpolation, if interpolation is needed, the percentage shares in total income of the
successive quintiles of the country's population.