with rapid growth in the quantity of money, as in Brazil or Chile or in
the United States in recent years, and why low and falling interest
rates have been associated with slow growth in the quantity of money,
as in Switzerland now or in the United States from 1929 to 1933. As an
empirical matter, low interest rates are a sign that monetary policy has
been tight-in the sense that the quantity of money has grown slowly;
high interest rates are a sign that monetary policy has been easy-in
the sense that the quantity of money has grown rapidly. The broadest
facts of experience run in precisely the opposite direction from that
which the financial community and academic economists have all generally
taken for granted.
Paradoxically, the monetary authority could assure low nominal rates
of interest-but to do so it would have to start out in what seems like
the opposite direction, by engaging in a deflationary monetary policy.
Similarly, it could assure high nominal interest rates by engaging in an
inflationary policy and accepting a temporary movement in interest
rates in the opposite direction.
These considerations not only explain why monetary policy cannot
peg interest rates; they also explain why interest rates are such a misleading
indicator of whether monetary policy is "tight" or "easy." For
that, it is far better to look at the rate of change of the quantity of
money.'
Employment as a Criterion of Policy
The second limitation I wish to discuss goes more against the grain
of current thinking. Monetary growth, it is widely held, will tend to
stimulate employment; monetary contraction, to retard employment.
Why, then, cannot the monetary authority adopt a target for employment
or unemployment-say, 3 per cent unemployment; be tight when
unemployment is less than the target; be easy when unemployment is
higher than the target; and in this way peg unemployment at, say, 3
per cent? The reason it cannot is precisely the same as for interest
rates-the difference between the immediate and the delayed consequences
of such a policy.
Tlhanks to Wicksell, we are all acquainted with the concept of a
"natural" rate of interest and the possibility of a discrepancy between
the "natural" and the "market" rate. The preceding analysis of interest
rates can be translated fairly directly into Wickse]lian terms. The monetary
authority can make the market rate less than the natural rate