and its annual increment roughly 22 instead of 4 millions. Meanwhile
the world's population had risen from less than a billion to just over
2 billion; that of Europe and the Soviet Union to over a half billion,
nearly triple the 1800 figure. Of Europe's population nearly three persons
in ten lived in 248 cities of 100,000 and over, compared with only
about one in thirty in 18 such cities in 1800. Meanwhile the world's
cities of 100,000 and over had risen in number eighteenfold to nearly
700 and their relative population eightfold to 11 per cent of the world
total. It is not entirely surprising, therefore, that Alfred Marshall
could write in 1920 (Principles, preface):

In the present age, the opening out of new countries aided by low
transport charges on land and sea, has almost suspended the tendency
to Diminishing Return . . . and yet, if the growth of population should
continue for very long even at a quarter of its present rate, the aggregate
rental value of land for all uses . . may again exceed the aggregate
of incomes derived from all other forms of material property.
Nor is it surprising that Malthus's Geometrical Ratio should be rediscovered
in the 1920's [39], and that J. M. Keynes could warn that the
Malthusian Devil had broken his chains in a world ridden by diminishing
returns. Overpopulated Europe in particular was threatened, he believed.
The inequality essential to adequate capital formation was unlikely
to be tolerated, and Europe's terms of trade were destined to turn
against her, dependent as she was upon produce imported from a New
World now become subject to diminishing returns. It was questionable,
therefore, if her precarious economy any longer enjoyed a margin of
safety against dislocation, a probable sequel to the treaty of Versailles
[23]. At least four aspects of economists' response to Malthus's Essay
in this period merit attention.

1. Malthus's Essay directed attention to the critical role of limitational
factors and to the impact of adverse externalities associated
with population growth. His ultimate limitational factor was land or
"room." He implied, however, that it could be some other source of
man's living budget, should man practice moral restraint. While England'
s marginal per acre wheat yield was only 8 bushels in 1812, the
average having fallen from 24 in 1771 to 22 in 1812 [8, 2nd. ed., pp.
225-26]. M1althus did not draw upon this sort of evidence. Instead he
seems to have reasoned from the limitedness of arable land and its
yields to his expositive theorem that the food supply could grow only 1
/n per quarter-century where n denotes the existing food supply. This
model gives a falling average but not finally a falling incremental rate
of food and population growth as did P. F. Verhulst's logistic curve,
designed in 1838 to reflect the increasing resistance population growth
encountered from increasing density and its concomitants.