I. Shying Away from Investment in Man
Economists have long known that people are an important part of the
wealth of nations. Measured by what labor contributes to output, the
productive capacity of human beings is now vastly larger than all other
forms of wealth taken together. What economists have not stressed is
the simple truth that people invest in themselves and that these invest-
ments are very large. Although economists are seldom timid in entering
on abstract analysis and are often proud of being impractical, they
have not been bold in coming to grips with this form of investment.
Whenever they come even close, they proceed gingerly as if they were
stepping into deep water. No doubt there are reasons for being wary.
Deep-seated moral and philosophical issues are ever present. Free men
are first and foremost the end to be served by economic endeavor; they
are not property or marketable assets. And not least, it has been all too
convenient in marginal productivity analysis to treat labor as if it were
a unique bundle of innate abilities that are wholly free of capital.
The mere thought of investment in human beings is offensive to some
among us.1 Our values and beliefs inhibit us from looking upon human
beings as capital goods, except in slavery, and this we abhor. We are
not unaffected by the long struggle to rid society of indentured service
and to evolve political and legal institutions to keep men free from
bondage. These are achievements that we prize highly. Hence, to treat
human beings as wealth that can be augmented by investment runs
counter to deeply held values. It seems to reduce man once again to a
mere material component, to something akin to property. And for man
to look upon himself as a capital good, even if it did not impair his
freedom, may seem to debase him. No less a person than J. S. Mill at
one time insisted that the people of a country should not be looked
upon as wealth because wealth existed only for the sake of people [15].
But surely Mill was wrong; there is nothing in the concept of human
wealth contrary to his idea that it exists only for the advantage of
people. By investing in themselves, people can enlarge the range of
choice available to them. It is one way free men can enhance their wel-
fare.
Among the few who have looked upon human beings as capital, there
are three distinguished names. The philosopher-economist Adam Smith
boldly included all of the acquired and useful abilities of all of the
inhabitants of a country as a part of capital. So did H. von Thiinen,
who then went on to argue that the concept of capital applied to man
did not degrade him or impair his freedom and dignity, but on the
contrary that the failure to apply the concept was especially pernicious
in wars; ". . . for here . . . one will sacrifice in a battle a hundred