geous to the community" the statesman should avoid protective duties
[10, pp. 485-86]. To the extent that theory was guiding Sidgwick,
surely it was a theory of government rather than of economics.
There is one primary reason why the theory is not, as a rule, coercive
with respect to the policies that a believer in the theory must
accept: a theory can usually be made to support diverse policy positions.
Theories present general relationships, and which part of a
theory is decisive in a particular context is a matter of empirical evidence.
Consider the wages-fund doctrine, if I may be permitted to refer
to it without its almost inseparable prefix, notorious. This theory asserted
that there was a relatively fixed amount to be paid in wages in
the short run, and that if one group got higher wages, other groups
would get lower wages or be unemployed. It followed that if a particular
group of workers formed a union and managed to raise their wages,
other workers would bear the burden, and numerous disciples of the
wages-fund doctrine accepted this policy view."8 But John Stuart Mill
could argue, quite in the opposite direction, that since most workers
would be at a subsistence level, at most the successful union would inflict
only short-run harm on other workers, whereas its higher income
could be permanent.19 And obviously it is a quantitative question
whether the short-run costs or the permanent benefits were larger.
What is true of the wages-fund theory is true of other theories: an
empirical question always insists upon intruding between the formal
doctrine and its concrete application. The truly remarkable fact is not
that economists accepting the same theory sometimes differ on policy,
but that they differ so seldom. The wide consensus at any time comes,
I suspect, from a tacit acceptance of the same implicit empirical assumptions
by most economists. All classical economists accepted as a
fact the belief that wage earners would not save, although they had no
evidence on the matter. All modern economists believe they will never
encounter Edgeworth's taxation paradox, with no more evidence. All
economists at all times accept the universality of negatively sloping
demand curves, and they do so without any serious search for contrary
empirical evidence.
These empirical consensuses have no doubt usually been correct-one
can know a thing without a sophisticated study. Truth was born before
modern statistics. Yet generations of economists also believed that over
long periods diminishing returns would inevitably triumph over technological
advance in agriculture, a view that agricultural history of the
last 100 years has coolly ignored.
A second and lesser source of the loose connection between theory
"For example, J. E. Cairnes, Some Leading Principles of Political Economy (London
1873), pp. 258-60.
19 Principles of Political Economy, Ashley ed. (London 1929), p. 402.