lem we have to solve.'8 Three conditions seem to be decisive in assigning
the type of approach to the type of problem. The simple marginal
formula based on profit maximization is suitable where (1) large
groups of firms are involved and nothing has to be predicted about
particular firms, (2) the effects of a specified change in conditions
upon prices, inputs, and outputs are to be explained or predicted rather
than the values of these magnitudes before or after the change, and
nothing has to be said about the "total situation" or general developments,
and (3) only qualitative answers, that is, answers about directions
of change, are sought rather than precise numerical results. Managerial
marginalism is more suitable to problems concerning particular
firms and calling for numerical answers. And, I am sure, there are also
some problems to which behavioral theory may be the most helpful approach.
My impression is that it will be entirely concerned with particular
firms and perhaps designed to give answers of a normative, that
is, advisory nature.
It looks as if I had prepared the ground for a love feast: I have
made polite bows in all directions and have tuned up for a hymn in
praise of peaceful coexistence of allegedly antagonistic positions. But I
cannot help raising a question which may tear open some of the
wounds of the battle of 1946. The question is whether the effects of an
effective increase in minimum wages upon the employment of labor of
low productivity can, at our present state of knowledge, be fruitfully
analyzed with any other model than that of simple marginalism based
on unadulterated profit maximization.
If I answer in the negative, does this mean that we are back at the
old quarrel and have not learned anything? It does not mean this.
Deficiencies in marginal analysis have been shown and recognized;
and a great deal of good empirical as well as theoretical work has been
accomplished. But the deficiencies dealt with were not just those which
the critics twenty years ago attacked. That attack questioned the applicability
of marginal analysis to the employment effects of wage increases
in industries with many firms presumably under heavy competition
[16, pp. 64, 75-77]. In such circumstances the managerial theories
of the firm, according to their proponents, do not apply. On this
narrow issue, therefore, the old-type marginalist cannot retreat.
' As a matter of fact, it will also depend on the research techniques which the appoinite(1
analyst has learned to master; we can eliminate this bias by assuming an ideal analyst
equally adept in all techniques.
REFERENCES
1. C. I. BARNARD, Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, Mass. 1938.
2. W. J. BAUMOL, Business Behavior, Value and Growth. New York 1959.