Basically provision for the economy's functional foremen is made
by two institutions, property and the wage system. The form of property
involved is the business proprietorship or net worth. From the
point of view of the accountant net worth is merely a residual claim to
the assets of a business, what is left of the assets after the claims of
creditors are satisfied. But the title to a business is much more than this.
In the case of a sole proprietorship it conveys to the proprietor the
right to manage the business and the right to the profits derived from it.
In the case of an incorporated enterprise these rights are conveyed to
the corporation as a legal person, which means in effect that the management
is vested in the corporation's directors and officers.
The title to a business clothes the economy's functional foremen with
managerial authority. At the same time the wage system imposes on its
employees the obligation of stubservience. As John R. Commons insisted,
the wage bargain is more than a mere bargaining transaction
between equals before the law, it is also what he called a "managerial
transaction." It makes "One person . . . a legal superior who has the
legal right to issue commands. The other . . . a legal inferior who, while
the relation lasts, is bound by the legal duty of obedience."13
Thus the institution of the business proprietorship and the wage
system together provide for the establishment and operation of business
enterprises that are not mere one-man affairs but social organizations,
and also provide for the expansion of such organizations. And in this
kind of a social organization the management not only issues orders to
the employees but also in any large enterprise it prescribes and administers
rules governing their conduct as employees and inflicts penalties
for disobedience, among others the penalty of dismissal. It need
scarcely be said that making and administering shop rules and inflicting
penalties involve quasigovernmental powers; the setting up a business
organization means in fact establishing a kind of industrial government.

When we in the West speak of our free way of life we commonly
have in mind both our free enterprise system and our bill of personal
rights and liberties. Sometimes I fear it has been assumed that the two
types of freedom involved are one and the same. They do have a good
deal in common, it is true, but they are not the same, and particularly
when we are considering the way business proprietorship and the wage
system provide for our economy's functional foremen, it is urgent to
distinguish them.
Let us briefly recall the main items that have so far attained a recognized
place in our bill of personal rights and liberties. These include:
the right to vote, eligibility to hold public office; the right to a fair
13 J. R. Commons, Institutional Economics (New York, 1934), p. 64.