turn of the century is in at least partial eclipse. The demand, particularly
in the field of transportation, is for less rather than for more.
Government has gone very far in turning over to, or permitting business
participation in, decisions which elsewhere are made only by government.
This tendency has been most pronounced in the field of
research and development but it extends also to the loan insurance
and loan guarantee schemes of the Federal Housing Authority and
is part of a more general trend toward "contracting out" functions
that government proposes to support. This is one reason why federal
employment has not increased as rapidly as federal expenditures. But
it also suggests that there is very little disposition in this country for
government encroachment on traditional areas of business responsibility.


Part of the reason for a failure of both government and business
to adjust adequately to the change in this relative command over resources
is the rapidity with which the change was accomplished. If
one examines the history of federal expenditures as a percentage of
gross national product there was a continuous decline from about 5
per cent in 1870 (when federal finances still bore some of the Civil
War Impact) to roughly 2 per cent in 1912, 1913, and 1914.1 The
First World War, of course, greatly increased this percentage but it
is remarkable how rapidly and completely the share of the federal
government expenditures in GNP declined after the war. Despite a
sizeable increase in interest payments on the public debt the share of
total federal expenditures in GNP was only 4.6 per cent in 1922 and
declined to 3 per cent in 1929. In that year federal expenditures were
less than half of state and local expenditures but all government expenditures
as a percentage of national income were distinctly lower
than in most Western European countries. The rise in government
expenditures began much earlier in Western Europe, and this longer
period of growth, it may be conjectured, has had something to do with
an obviously more complete assimilation of the changed role of government
by the community as a whole.

The great increase in federal expenditures both as a percentage
of GNP and in relation to state and local expenditures began only in
the 1930's. The share of federal expenditures in GNP increased from
4.1 per cent in 1930 to around 10 per cent by the end of the decade.
This high percentage reflected, of course, both the large public expenditure
for newly introduced social services, and the low level of
GNP still laboring under massive unemployment. Federal civilian
expenditures as a percentage of state and local expenditures reached
a high point of 52 per cent in 1948 and have declined somewhat since