which individuals place upon group interests and common interests.32
There are two ways in which groups may advance their interests. One is
based upon a high valuation of one's special interests, and involves
improving the bargaining position of the group for the purpose of
getting a larger share of an income flow with little regard to the effect
upon the size of the total income flow. The other is based upon a high
valuation of general interests and involves restraint in pressing special
claims which conflict with general interests.
It is not for the economist qua economist to quarrel with the valuations
which individuals and groups place upon their interests. He is,
however, within his scientific rights when he points out that these valuations
have profound economic effects. They determine both the methods
of production which it is possible to use and the quantity of goods that
can be produced. High valuations of special interests can throttle production
and render the government and every one else incapable of
providing a satisfactory level of employment. High valuations of common
interests will produce public and private policies that will prevent
there being a problem of long-term unemployment.
Is it at all thinkable that groups of workers, employers, and farmers
in dealing with one another and in pressing claims for legislation will
be limited or guided to a substantial extent by concern for the national
income? Or as these groups become more and more highly organized and
more and more conscious of their particular interests, will they become
less and less disposed to place high valuations on common interests?
No one knows. Larger units of decision would help. Wage policy, for
example, which is now made by groups too small to feel much responsibility
for the general level of employment, might be made by units such
as the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Association
of Manufacturers on the one hand and the American Federation of
Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations on the other."3
Perhaps new machinery must be invented in order that all groups may
agree on the restraints that shall be placed upon their special interests
and in order to make possible new ways of promoting common interests.
A lively concern for common interests by well-organized and selfconscious
special groups may seem a utopian dream; but in an economy
in which the policies of government and of large private groups determine
employment, what substitute is there for it? The possibilities of