To ask such questions is to show at once how fundamentally times,
terms and concepts have changed. To begin with, the economic system
of Soviet Russia, together with its political, social and cultural manifestations,
cannot be considered socialistic in any sense which would have
been considered legitimate by Utopian socialist philosophers nor indeed
by Marxian socialist theoreticians of pre-Soviet times. This Soviet society
is far more authoritarian and less egalitarian than our own and the
workers in it have far less control over the conditions of their employment.
The Soviet economy is indeed collectivist and the antithesis of a
capitalistic laissez-faire economic system but it cannot be described by
the term socialistic if that term is to have its traditional meaning.
If the Soviet system cannot be considered socialistic, what of the
economic systems of other important industrialized countries such as
the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy and Japan, Canada and
the United States? Can they be considered any longer capitalistic as
that term has been understood in the past?
Here, too, we find complexity. It is not merely that it is difficult to
forecast political-economic trends in these countries. The problem of
analysis has a much more baffling aspect. It is this: How can one tell
when an economic system has undergone fundamental change? What
basic differences are there, for example, between an industry which
has been nationalized and one which has not? You will recall Geoffrey
Crowther's story about the British civil servant who explained to the
visiting American that under the Labour government there were two
categories of industries in the United Kingdom. One category, he said,
comprised most industries, those which were still in private and corporate
hands but over which the government nevertheless exercised a
large measure of control. The other category comprised industries which
had been nationalized, over which the government had no control at all!
Those of us who have served our own government and who will recall
difficulties in dealing with other government officials as compared with
the sometimes lesser difficulties of an official clothed with the authority
of government in dealing with executives of business corporations will,
I think, find a real germ of truth in this nonsense.
What is not nonsense is to question how basically the organization
and functioning of the railways, the coal mines or the steel industry in
the United Kingdom, for example, differs under nationalization from
that under private, corporate, ownership.
One might question whether the capitalistic system in the process of
evolution through its corporate form has not developed toward the
collectivist form, moving towards the point where transfiguration would
be complete and the two would become virtually indistinguishable. This
evolution, whether or not it is legitimate to characterize it in such extreme