Evening Post article, 'Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren.'"
"Two-thirds of the title came from Tawney's The Acquisitive Society."
"The point about the need to spend more these days on public rather
than private wants was already made eloquently by Alvin Hansen and
others; in any case it involves a value judgment not a scientific finding.
" "Harvard professors may have incomes high enough to satiate
them, but most people do not." "So what's the matter with big auto
fins? Didn't you ever hear of Freud? And how about Jeremy Bentham'
s dictum concerning the equality of pleasures, 'Pushpin is as
good as poetry?'" "Are commercially created wants different, or less
satisfying, or less worthy than natural wants, whatever those may be?"
"The book's style is superficially attractive but its message is not
profound."
I am afraid people in the boudoir, today or twenty years from now,
will not seek the benefit of our professional reactions. Within the body
of economics itself, The Affluent Society will find a place that is proportionate
to the new predictions about economic regularities it may
suggest. But whatever the later verdict about the operational meaning
of its propositions, we can no more recall it or wipe out half a line of
it than we can-by professional exlegesis-expunge Henry George's
Progress and Poverty from the historical record.
III. Political Econornists: Ourselves to Know
Leaving aside how our own profession rates and ranks the craftsmen
of its trade, I now want to close in on the differences between our
view of ideologies and Weltanschauungen and that of the intelligent
man of affairs. Who do we think were the great political economists
as against just great economists?
Adam Smith. Going back no earlier than Adam Smith, we can let
Smith stand for the classical tradition. And, in my telescope, he stands
on a pinnacle. While I think Smith is underrated as an economic
theorist, it must be admitted that his impact as a political economist
does not rest upon his having improved upon theories of his friend
David Hume; nor upon his having anticipated the various refinements
of Malthus, West, Ricardo, Torrens, and John Stuart Mill.
Here is a case where the inside view and the outside view are one.
The intelligent man of affairs, and even Macaulay's schoolboy, were
profoundly influenced by Smith's attacks on mercantilism and state
interference and by his spirited championing of laissez faire. To be
sure, the amateur never appreciates the nuances of Smith's position:
e.g., his skepticism about the businessman's passion for tough competition;
his definite role for limited government; his general pragmatism
rather than dogmatism.