and other durable and semidurable goods utilized, and the services of
human beings used, by an individual or group, in a given period of time.
What is miscalled the decline of the "standard of living," in depression
or war, usually means such reduction in the quantity or quality (or
both) of many of the goods which people consume, that their net
aggregate consumption falls. A rise in the consumption level means an
increase in the volume of actual consumption, and/or improvement in
its quality, such as typically occurs in boom periods and in recovery
from depression or war. Precise degrees of increase or reduction in consumption
levels are not readily measured, but either is easily recognized
by the individual or group concerned, and usually by outsiders
also. The reduction or increase is never uniform among all goods consumed;
it is accompanied by changes in composition and proportions.
Nutritionists know that a balanced diet for an individual provides
not only essential numbers of calories but also minimum or optimum
amounts of proteins, several vitamins., and several minerals. The required
amounts and proportions vary with age, sex, weight, occupation,
exposure, and other factors, and even for broad averages "requirements"
are not yet determined with precision. An individual can get a
balanced diet from a large number of possible combinations of foods,
varying through a wide range in selection, consumer appeal, and cost.
The fact of balance is likewise fundamental in consumption as a
whole, though criteria for determining lack of balance in consumption
are far less developed than in the science of nutrition. Most individuals
are conscious of any severe disturbance of their consumption balance,
while minor disturbances may pass unnoticed. One rarely finds a grand
piano in a hovel, a gourmet in tatters, or a new Rolls-Royce sported
by one who enjoys no other comforts or luxuries. Misjudgments in
choosing a home or a car, however, not infrequently entail unexpected
sacrifices in food, clothing, or leisure. Essentials for health may be
unconsciously or deliberately sacrificed to transitory pleasures or to the
acquisition of extended training. In our eyes bric-a-brac held too high
a place in Victorian consumption. In retrospect it may appear that
gadgets, gewgaws, and gimcracks loom too large in our own. Among the
most important tasks of education in various forms is facilitating
improvement in the balance of consumption, -such as the individual or
group concerned will recognize and value.

Consumption may be such as merely to sustain life,' at a minimum
or conventional level; it is in this sense that the obsolete phrase "means
of subsistence" was long used. It may go further and enhance the
productive power of the consumer and/or enrich the quality of life. On
the other hand, consumption may be so distorted as to diminish health
and life expectancy, reduce productive power, and impoverish the