unit of output than a somewhat higher rate of exchange. But there still
remains the implication that, in some significant sense, a maximum favorable
balance of trade and its accompanying exchange rate are
optimal. What is this sense?

There are indeed many possibilities, but the one most characteristic
of formal Keynesian theory would involve the multiplier effect from the
stimulus to effective domestic demand proceeding from a favorable
balance of trade. If this correctly interprets the concept, as I cannot unfortunately
be sure, an optimum rate of exchange signifies-conformably
to this system of thought-the maximum gain in domestic employment
to be had at the expense of employment in other countries. In
another essay Mrs. Robinson eloquently describes this as a "beggar-myneighbor"
policy.7 Thus the optimum includes only the citizens of the
favored country and reduces the field of free choice and the maximizing
of want satisfaction in other countries. If such an exchange rate is perpetuated
by authoritarian controls, the policy is clearly a political choice
at the expense of free individual choice for the foreigners. There can be
little doubt-whatever the intent of the author of this theoretical concept-
that substantially this course has been actively advocated by
Balogh, Schumacher, and kindred spirits.8

III

I have maintained the thesis that the central economic problem is the
application of scarce means to unlimited wants; that scarcity resolves
itself principally into cost to individuals and the uncovered demand
resolves itself ultimately into the unsatisfied wants of individuals; and
finally, that the basic economic process is thus a weighing of costs to
individuals and of utilities or satisfactions to individuals. These propositions
do not, on the one hand, give results which are merely semantic
or definitional, because they are set together of a straight-forward logical
sequence. On the other hand, the propositions merely distinguish
economic choices from those arrived at on ethical, social, or political
grounds, without prejudice to any of these.

What useful inferences, then, can possibly be drawn from such innocuous
analysis? The review of economic or quasi-economic maxima
illustrates one point with what I believe to be sufficient clarity: the ease
with which it is possible to pass by small gradations from economic
maxima reflecting the free choice of individuals in market decisions,
to maxima more or less heavily imbued with political or ethical judgments,