the state, is an end in itself. The only end is the human individualyou,
and I, and everyone else. Individuals are the only living things.
Nations "live" only because they are a succession of individuals molded
in, and to, a common ethos. Social welfare means nothing if it is not
the welfare of persons. There should be nothing startling in such a
philosophy of individualism. It is to be emphasized, however, that it
has nothing in common with what is commonly known as "rugged individualism,
" since the latter is a philosophy of means, not ends. The
view that the individual is the only end is at least as old as Christianity;
it is the only doctrine consistent with fundamental democracy.
To put all institutions in the category of instrumental values is not
to deny or diminish their importance. No study or policy designed to
make them more effective in the service of human values is wasted.
But when, as so frequently happens, the political party, the church, the
trade union, or private enterprise is made an end in itself, men set up
false gods, we fall into futile idolatry, and the logic of economy is completely
inverted. There would be less reason for such a statement in
this presence, if economists and political scientists, themselves, did not
frequently seem to hypostatize into ends the economic and political
instrumentalities with which, perforce, they are professionally concerned.


The function of political science and economics is to see how these
instrumentalities work, and to make plans for their better working.
Our general task, therefore, is in the nature of job analysis. But we cannot
make an intelligent, or a valid, job analysis unless we decide what
the job is to- do. And we ought to remember that whatever its immediate
objectives, the job always has to do, directly or indirectly, with
the intrinsic values of life in a civilized, democratic society. Without,
then, feeling that we are departing from the objectivity appropriate to
the social sciences, we do well to bring ourselves up short, and ask of
ourselves, "What are we here for, anyhow? What valid excuse for
existence has an economist or a political scientist? What human values
are we trying to realize? And for whom?"

The job we have to do will be better done if we do not permit the
trees to blind us to the forest. We must avoid giving our whole attention
to short-run implemental tasks. The program of the three professional
associations meeting together this year is devoted mainly to
long-run problems, not in the belief that immediate post-war problems
will not be pressing and critical, but in the conviction that these immediate
problems themselves will be better met, and with likelihood of
fewer headaches in afteryears, if we approach them in the light of basic
principles, and of the human values to the furtherance of which our
democratic way of life commits us. The policies we adopt now will