money profits, or whether they even strive to maximize their
money profits, but rather whether the assumption that this is the objective
of the theoretical firms in the artificial world of our construction
will lead to conclusions-"inferred outcomes"-very different
from those derived from admittedly more realistic assumptions.
The second qualification in my list-regarding bosses, colleagues
and subordinates-is quite irrelevant, except perhaps for questions of
welfare economics, where it matters whether firms "really" do all they
can to maximize efficiency. For theories concerned with changes in
prices, inputs, and outputs in response to changes to conditions (of
production, resource availability, and product demand) the strictness
with which efficiency is watched in the firm does not matter. The
effects of the tariff increase in our illustration, or the effects of changes
in wage rates, interest rates, tax rates, and so forth, are if there is
effective competition, essentially independent of the relations among
the various levels in the managerial hierarchy of the firm.
It would take too much time here to go through our entire list of
reservations. Anybody who makes the effort will find that some of the
"realistic assumptions" proposed for inclusion in the theory can affect
(by an unknown amount) the magnitude but not the direction of any
change that is likely to result from a specified change in conditions;
and that other assumptions will not even do that much. In short, they
are all irrelevant for purposes of competitive price theory.
Oligopoly, Monopoly, and Managerial Discretion
I repeat: In the theory of competitive price the "real existence" of
firms is irrelevant; imaginary (postulated) agents pursuing a simple
(postulated) goal react to assumed changes in conditions and thereby
produce (or allow us to infer) changes in prices, inputs, and outputs
[24, pp. 13-14]. The correspondence between these inferences (deduced
changes) and actual observations (observed changes in prices,
inputs, and outputs, following observed changes in conditions) is close
for two reasons: (1) The number of firms in the real world is so large
that it suffices if some of them react as posited by the theory; and (2)
the profits of firms are only about "normal," that is, excess profits are
about zero, because of competitive pressures from newcomers (pliopolistic
pressures [23, pp. 211-23]), so that profits below the maximum
obtainable would in fact be net losses in an economic sense.
These two reasons do not hold in the theories of oligopoly and monopoly
price.8 For these theories the real existence of firms (that is, an