narrow selfishness; and (3) certain operational characteristics of private
enterprise itself, as we have thus far known it.

Moral and religious sentiments not always, but in many cases are
stubborn impediments to economic progress, specifically because a
high material standard of living is not an item high on their scale of
values. We find religious sentiments a serious obstacle to attempts to
raise the standard of living internationally. In some countries, our own
included, religion has adapted itself to the growing appeal of material
values, and to the spread of rationalism and humanism associated with
the whole democratic movement. In no democratic country is it necessary
to argue that the abolition of poverty is desirable. But there are
countries where, on moral and religious grounds, the steps necessary
for the permanent mitigation (let alone abolition) of poverty would be
resisted by the people themselves.

One of these necessary steps is certainly the attainment of a reasonable
relation between population and resources. In all thinking about
raising the standard of living "throughout the world," the population
problem should be basic. Everywhere, sooner or later, cessation of population
growth is a prime prerequisite to the abolition of poverty. It is
the fashion nowadays to say that Malthus is outmoded. But for the
long run, Malthus was everlastingly right. With the near-certainty that
we are approaching a stationary population in this country, we do not
need to worry about domestic overpopulation. But in the global field
of international economics and politics, we do.

It is being said that this country cannot be prosperous unless others
are also. This is one of those generalizations which may be something
more than half truth, or vicious untruth, according to the context. We
cannot safely concede too much to those idealists, sincere as they are,
who hold that we must sacrifice our own standard of living in order to
raise that of less fortunate-or less rational-peoples. Certainly, as an
emergency demand, no sane person will question that we must make
heavy sacrifices for the rehabilitation of the devastated countries. But
anything more is debatable. We are responsible for unemployment and
poverty among our own hundred thirty million people, but are we responsible
for the economic lot of the teeming millions of Asia and other
grossly overpopulated regions? Does the standard of living to which
any given country may reasonably aspire have any relation to that
country's own natural resources, or does it not? The Atlantic Charter
called for freedom of trade-fortunately with reservations. Does this
mean, also, freedom of migration, with or without reservations? There
are people in other countries who think it does. Has any country which
does not exercise birth control the right to export its human surplus,
and thus glut the labor market of other countries?