tions. An able young American scholar, David Durand,'2 had published
in 1937, an excellent critical article of the earlier material, and had
urged that the restricted function of
P = bLkCl-k (1)
be abandoned for one in which the exponent for capital was independently
determined. As he correctly pointed out, the use of the k and 1-k
function assumed the existence of an economic law which it should
be one of the tasks of science to test, namely, the assumption of true
constant returns. If we permitted the exponent for capital to be independently
determined, it would then be possible for the sum of the
exponents to be either greater or less than unity and hence to show
true increasing and decreasing as well as constant returns to scale. We
therefore decided that Durand's suggestion should be adopted and that
we should try to find the values in terms of the formula:
P - bLkC] (2)
The second change was to broaden our fields of investigation.
Hitherto, we had dealt only with time studies and had found the
values of our exponents from index numbers of labor, capital, and
product within a given economy, with each year serving as a separate
observation. Here we measured the effect upon total physical product,
of changes in the physical quantities of labor and of capital and from
these we derived curves of diminishing incremental physical productivity
of the classical type. We now determined to open up another
field for investigation and to make cross-section analyses between industries
in a given economy for specific years. Thus the annual statistics
of manufacturing for the British Dominions (although not the
British Census of Production itself) and the decennial and quinquennial
Censuses for Manufacturing for the United States up until
1921 showed aggregates for each of a wide variety of industries from
which it was possible to compute: (1) aggregates of the average
numbers employed, including wage earners, clerical and salaried
employees, officials and generally firm members and working proprietors
(L), (2) aggregates of capital (C) expressed in terms of
dollars including both fixed and working capital, and (3) aggregates
of the net value of product added by manufacturing expressed in terms
of dollars (P).
In these studies, differences between industries in the quantities of
their net value product were presumed to be a function of the total
"2David Durand, "Some Thoughts on Marginal Productivity with Special Reference to
Professor Douglas' Analysis," Jour. Pol. Econ., Vol. XLV (Dec., 1937), pp. 740-58.