week, and enlarge our agricultural output with fewer farm workers.
We could readjust our content and standards of living without radical
injury to health, efficiency, or morale.
Similar factors go far to explain the survival of the United Kingdom
when her engulfment seemed to many inevitable, her leadership in the
war before Pearl Harbor, and her effective continued partnership in
subsequent years. Far more than Americans, the British have demonstrated
remarkable ability to tolerate drastic shrinkage of their accustomed
content of living and yet maintain their health, efficiency,
and balance. Germans, Russians, and Japanese have all displayed unexpected
reserves above bare subsistence that could be devoted first
to armament in all its phases and then to prosecution of the war itself.
The present vulnerability of Germany and Japan lies partly in the
narrower margins they have for contracting their planes of living,
hence the smaller reserves that they can draw upon to avert defeat.
Standards of Living
The standard of living, in its most significant sense, is the plane or
content of living which an individual or group earnestly seeks and
strives to attain, to maintain if attained, to preserve if threatened, and
to regain if lost. Though influenced by subjective factors and not easy
to ascertain with precision, it is no less a reality than the experienced
content of living. It is likewise made up of components urgently wanted
and worked for, not of dreams or visions, but in various respects it is
typically ampler than the current plane of living.
The relationship between level and corresponding standard is of
profound significance. This is one basic reason for sharpening the distinctions
on which I insist. The urgent, unsatisfied wants may be for
additional consumer goods or a better quality of them, for shorter hours
of work or more regular employment, for better protection against
illness, death, war, and depressions, for enlarged freedom to learn,
speak, vote, travel, or shift occupation, for greater harmony in the
home, factory, community, nation, and community of nations. It is this
margin between standard and content of living that furnishes essential
incentives to achieve an ampler content of living. Indeed, here is a major
reason why some countries have achieved political and economic advances,
and why population growth has slowed down in the Western
World. Even where in our eyes the standards are grotesquely distorted,
as most of us believe to be true of those developed under the Hitler
regime in Germany, we recognize the power of the incentives provided
by the difference between plane and standard.
Where level and standard are virtually identical, the individuals concerned