This country abandoned traditional laissez-faire largely because recurrent
booms and depressions had demonstrated the inefficiency of
unregulated private enterprise, its inability to cope with the problems
of a complex society. If government in turn shows itself incapable of
dealing effectively with these problems, then in what direction will the
country move? Will it be toward communism, fascism or anarchy? There
is little solace for America in any of these alternatives. Preservation of
democracy is the country's wish, but if democracy is to be preserved, it
must function efficiently. Its ideals must be implemented and made
secure by governmental machinery capable of carrying out the people's
will effectively and without undue delay.
The need for better organization of policy formation has been recognized
for a long time and its urgency has become more apparent during
the great depression of the thirties and during and after the Second
World War. Its acuteness has not abated but increased during the present
period of reconstruction.
One important move toward better coordination of government activities
was taken when the Act putting into effect the Bretton Woods
Agreements provided for a National Advisory Council on International
Monetary and Financial Problems to consist of the Secretaries of the
Treasury, State, and Commerce, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, and the Chairman of the Export-Import Bank. This Council has
the function of considering with the American representatives on the
International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development the general policies to be pursued by the
United States in the field of international finance, and particularly matters
in which decisions of these two institutions are subject to approval
by the United States. The Council is directed to coordinate, so far as
practicable, the policies and operations of the representatives of the
United States on the Fund, the Bank, the Export-Import Bank, and all
other agencies of the government engaging in foreign financial transactions.
It is required to make periodic reports to the President and to
the Congress. Since its organization the Council has been extremely active
and has represented the United States in negotiations in connection
with the British credit and the loans to France. Formal organization of
interdepartmental cooperation in international finance through this
Council is a constructive development of a high order of importance
and promise.
A potentially more important step was the adoption, after much discussion
and debate, of a law, known as the Employment Act of 1946,
approved by the President on February 20, 1946. This date may mark
the first step in the process of rationalizing the government on an overall
basis and organizing American democracy to fit modern conditions. The
Act, in effect, declares it to be the continuing policy of the federal government