does not know, or dc-s not have the power to advance, his own interests,
Smith feels remarkably free to have the state intervene.
Thus Smith says that to restrain people from entering voluntary
transactions "is a manifest violation of that natural liberty which it is
the proper business of law, not to infringe but to support"; yet he continues
[11, p. 308]:
But those exertions of the natural liberty of a few individuals, which might
endanger the security of the whole society, are, and ought to be, restrained
by the laws of all governments; of the most free, as well as of the most despotical.
The obligation of building party walls, in order to prevent the
communication of fire, is a violation of natural liberty, exactly of the same
kind with the regulations of the banking trade which are here proposed.
Natural liberty seems to have been little more than a working rule, and
Smith proposes numerous departures from natural liberty because the
participants are incompetent or fail to consider external effects of their
behavior.' He is quite willing to outlaw payment of wages in kind,
which he believes will defraud the worker, and to put a limit on interest
rates, because high interest rates encourage lenders to entrust their
funds to improvident projectors, and to have a complicated tax system
to change the uses of land.
The second foundation of Smith's strong preference for private economic
activity was that he deeply distrusted the state. This distrust, I
must emphasize, was primarily a distrust of the motives rather than of
the competence of the state. Smith makes very little of inept governmental
conduct-indeed he clearly believes that as far as efficiency is
concerned, the joint stock companies, and even more the universities,
are worse offenders than the state. His real complaint against the state
is that it is the creature of organized, articulate, self-serving groupsabove
all, the merchants and the manufacturers. The legislature is directed
less often by an extended view of the common good than by "the
clamorous importunity of partial interests" [11, p. 438].
Purely as a matter of professional appraisal, I would say that Smith
displayed superb craftsmanship in supporting his first argument-that
free individuals would use resources efficiently-but was excessively
dogmatic in asserting his second argument, which accepted the competence
but rejected the disinterest of the governmental machine. He gives
no persuasive evidence that the state achieves the goals of its policies,
and in particular he asserts rather than proves that the mercantile system
had a large effect upon the allocation of British resources. Nor does
he demonstrate that the state is normally the captive of "partial interests.
"
Smith's intellectual heirs did little to strengthen his case for laissez