done this in their discussions of the subject of information, its availability,
its uncertainty, and its subjectivity. I mean, of course, information
available to the "firm," and this raises the question whether we
mean the firm as a purely theoretical construct or the firm as an organization
of real people or anything else.

The firm as a theoretical construct has exactly the kind of information
the theorist chooses to endow it with in order to design a good,
useful theory. The firm as an organization of real people has the information
system that it actually happens to have and which, in some instances,
the management scientists (operations researchers) have succeeded
in developing. For purposes of competitive price and allocation
theory, it does not make much difference whether the information
which we assume the firm to have concerning the conditions of supply,
production, and demand under which it works is correct or incorrect,
as long as we may safely assume that any change in these conditions is
registered correctly. If we want to inquire into the effects of a change
in wage rates or tax rates or something of this sort, we must of course
take it for granted that the decision-makers who supposedly react to
the change have taken notice of it. But whether their "previous" store
of information-from which they started when the change occurredwas
accurate or not will only in exceptional instances make a qualitative
difference to the reactions.

This important difference between information about conditions and
information about changes in conditions has eluded several writers,
who shouted "tautology" when they confronted my statements about
the subjectivity of information. They reasoned like this: If firms act
on the basis of information which is entirely subjective, then anything
they do may be said to follow from whatever they believe they know:
hence, the assumption of subjectivism defeats any explanatory purposes.
This is a sad confusion. In teaching elementary economics we
ought to be able to make our students grasp the difference between the
shape and position of a curve, on the one hand, and the shift of a
curve, on the other. The direction of the effects which we derive from
the shift is usually, though not always, independent of the shape and
position of the original curve. We need not fuss about the curve
reflecting "accurate information" if we only want to see what happens
when the curve shifts in a certain direction.
