to see what is ahead and the adjustments needing to be made, for
the nation as a whole and by regions and major types of farming.
Much progress has been made along these lines in the
past ten years. The second part is reducing this to terms of
adjustments needed on representative or modal-type farms in different
sections of each state, so that those working with the farmers in these
sections will know each year in what direction the farming needs to
be heading so that it will fit into the pattern of needed change. This
should be a joint undertaking of the Agricultural Extension Service,
the Soil Conservation districts, the Farmers Home Administration local
offices, the Production Credit and the Farm Loan Associations, the
Farm Foresters, and all tied into the new Farm and Home Development
Program. The staffing of the Extension Service for its major
role in this effort is highly inadequate. About four times as much extension
effort is now going into technology of production as is going
into planning needed adjustments and implementing the plans. Also,
mnuch more production economics research is needed as a foundation
for this farm planning. Such research is rarely more than one-tenth of
the research of the State Experiment Station. The result is that the
agriculture of most of the nation is well out ahead with technology to
increase yields and make the land more productive, but poorly
equipped with the know-how of harnessing the knowledge and putting it
to such use as will make it contribute as effectively as it might to better
life on the farm and a more orderly serving of the needs of the rest of
the nation.
Finally, and most important of all, a successful handling of the
foregoing two problems will not help much the lower-income third of
our farm families, except in one important particular, namely, that a
steadily advancing economy with reasonably full employment will
provide employment outside of agriculture for nmore of these families
or members of them. Much of what is being said and written on this
problem these days is largely in terms of this solution. What they
propose in effect is to depopulate and abandon these low-income areas
as has been done in the past in much of the Northeast. Yet the bold
truth is that our country has grown to the point where in another
generation it is going to need to have much of these low-income areas
in agriculture and forest-crop production. Moreover, as has been
pointed out earlier, any contribution that the improving of agriculture
in these areas is going to make to surpluses in the next five years is so
small that it can be ignored. The other important factor in this situation
is that the technology of farming the land in much of the lowincome
area of the United States has been developed to the point that
all that is needed to have good incomes is to practice this technology on