could really teach people the simple and obvious fact, which
most of them already know but refuse to accept, that anyone producing
for exchange is producing for himself, as much as a Crusoe, but merely
a thousand times more effectively because he does it indirectly by producing
for the needs of others. If this were realized, it would surely put
an end to all the insane or diabolical revolutionary propaganda and
most of the stupid criticisms of the "capitalist system" that menace our
free institutions. Why it is necessary to teach this, and accordingly so
hard, if not useless to try, is the major real social problem. I can give it
little consideration here. But I must note an apparent "innate disposition"
in men to think that somebody is getting the better of them, that
they are working for somebody else, even where it is, if possible, more
absurd than the idea of the wage-worker that he is working to make
profits for some greedy capitalist. Doesn't the student regularly talk
about working for his professor, and even the patient aver that he
is coerced by his doctor, whom he hires and fires and even defies, at
will-except for the natural consequences? The much-abused "profitsystem"
is of course merely a pattern of cooperation, on the terms most
satisfactory to the parties concerned, or the only terms they can agree
upon. "Property" has intrinsically nothing to do with it; it may be and
is the same where only labor services are involved at all.
I wish I had time to follow up in particular the relation between
doctor and patient. The similarities and differences as compared with,
say, the relationships of an industrial corporation, should be interesting,
even instructive. Two or three obvious facts which need emphasis must
be barely mentioned. The doctor in whose hands one places oneself
as a "case" will inevitably have much power, variously and precariously
limited by moral, legal, and other restrictions and compulsions.
The only real freedom the patient can have is the right and opportunity
to choose and change at will his doctor. And the significance of this is
limited, since in the nature of things the patient cannot act very intelligently
in the matter. He would himself have to possess the specialized
knowledge of the medical profession, and much more, in
order to appraise it in others. But the case of individual patient and
individual doctor (or other professional counselor) is simple in comparison
with the problem presented by the vast and highly organized
productive units required for the exploitation of modern technology.
Here centralized direction is imperative anyway, apart from specialized
competence in the directive function. Hence the final word of the
candid economist to the public must be-don't expect too much, in
the way of freedom, or justice, along with the immeasurable increase
in technical efficiency that results from these two facts of modern
civilization, special competence, and centralized direction. In particular,