ject of bargaining among the various members of the "coalition" which
make up the business organization but that the goals are continually
adapted and are being pressed with varying force [10, pp. 40-43].
The behavior theory of the firm, with regard to the determination of
prices and outputs, will run in terms of a "quasi resolution of conflict"
within the organization, of an "adaptively rational, multiple-objective
process" with responses to "short-run feedback on performance" and
with continuing "organizational learning" [10, pp. 269-70].
This behavioral approach has been characterized as striving for
"realism in process," in contrast to approaches aiming at more "realism
in motivation" [48, p. 11]. Such realism in motivation is felt to
be needed chiefly because of the separation of ownership and control in
the modern corporation, whose managements have great power and
wide discretion.
In principle, I could expect three different views to be taken
regarding the relative independence of corporation management:
(1) Whereas owners would run their business chiefly with a view to a
maximum of money profits, managers run it with several supplementary
and partly competing goals in mind. (2) Whereas owners, especially
wealthy ones, would often allow nonprofit considerations to enter their
decision-making, managers have a sense of dedication and identification
with the business that makes them the more single-minded
seekers of profits. (3) Even if managers are inclined to indulge in
seeking other goals as long as profits look satisfactory, they are as
professionals, trained in the art and science of management, able to
make better profits than the owners could ever hope to make running
their own show.
What consequences can be drawn from this? One attitude would be
to stick with the assumption of profit maximization because it is the
simplest and is applicable with much less detailed information to the
largest field.' Another attitude would be to insist on starkest realism
with a complete catalogue of goals and indices of their effectiveness in
each firm. A third attitude would be to select two or three of the most
1 "To use marginalism in the theory of the firm it is not necessary to assert that firms  attempt to maximize money profits only nor to deny that a goodly portion of all business  behavior miay be nonrational, thoughtless, blindly repetitive, deliberately traditional, or  motivated by extra-economic objectives. It merely presupposes that the 'rational-economic'  portion of business conduct is by and large sufficiently important to affect what is going  on in the world to an extent large enough to warrant analysis; and that the substitution  of money profits for a composite of pecuniary and nonpecuniary rewards simplifies the  analysis so much that the gain in expediency far exceeds the loss in applicability" [23  pp. 30-31]. A similar view is expressed by Scitovsky: "Empirical studies of businessmen's  behavior suggest the need for modifying or qualifying the assumption of profit maximiza-  tion here and there, rather than scrapping it altogether. Accordingly, . . . we shall retain  the assumption that the firm aims at maximizing its profit. But we shall regard this  assumption as a working hypothesis rather than as a universal rule" [37, p. 111].