are not persons in the light of the United States Constitution. The
civil rights they have can be taken away by legislative act. In many
respects, in many states, they are still under the common law, in which
husband and wife are one person and that person the husband. If
women really are persons, these cultural lags should be removed, the
sooner the better.

Ethical democracy is practically synonymous with Christian ethics,
the essential contribution Christianity has made to modern civilization.
More to the point for the present discussion, ethical democracy is a
broad application of the fundamental principle of economy. The essence
of ethical democracy, of course, is that respect for the individual
-that individualism-of-ends-of which I have spoken. No democratically
minded person will countenance denial of civil or constitutional
rights, even to keep alleged radicals out of government jobs, or
deny equal economic opportunity to persons who happen to have been
born women, Negroes, Jews, or Protestants. This is hard, idealistic
doctrine. Merely to state it is to suggest how far from it we are in
practice, despite churches, Congressional committees, universities, and
Atlantic Charters.

Economic democracy can be summed up as equality of opportunity.
It cannot, however, reasonably mean the dead level of literally equal
opportunity. That would be the reverse of true economy. People are
born with unequal potential capacities. Equality of opportunity therefore
means opportunity in proportion to capacity to use it. Perhaps it
would be better to call it equity of opportunity. To distribute wealth
and income, and the opportunity they represent, in any other way is
patently a violation of the principle of economy, which is to put things
where they will do the most good. Democracy is perhaps epitomized in
the whole modern trend away from rigidity of status to freedom of opportunity.
Democracy is a movement toward greater economy in the
utilization of our human resources. Here, economics and ethics walk
hand in hand.

I have said that economics is a purposive science. Its purpose is the
efficient management of our resources, material and human, in the
processes of production and consumption. Its proper aim is not only
to promote the distribution of opportunity which conforms most nearly
to the principle of economy, but to secure the organization and coordination
necessary to the full utilization of resources. This means
that effective planning, and a well-organized setup of administration,
are essential, not inimical, to the democratic way of life. If we take
production, and not predation, exploitation, or bargaining capacity, as
the foundation of the wealth of the nation, economic democracy is the
only guide to rational economic management. I wish to emphasize this,