concerned here with an examination of the full range of growth considerations.
I link stabilization with growth policy because there is in
fact a connection. The investment, pricing, and innovation practices of
firms operating at high levels of capacity would appear to be more
conducive to growth in the economy as a whole than policies adapted
to substantial slack. But it is only in this sense that I am here concerned
with growth problems.

The relations of special groups to government as they affect stabilization
and growth policies are usually discussed under the headings of
"interests" and "ideologies." Are there objective economic interests
represented by particular groups having sufficient political power to
influence public action which impede or prevent effective stabilization
or growth policies? Are there casts of thought or opinion motivated
(subconsciously) by interests, and permitted to survive by ignorance,
that effectively handicap sensible action? Keynes held firm views on
these questions and in a famous phrase asserted that "it is ideas, not
vested interests, which are dangerous for good and evil." On the other
hand he painted a picture of the role of government in a mature society
together with the "euthanasia of the rentier" that was not calculated
to appeal to their interests as conceived by all groups. My
colleague, J. K. Galbraith, has written in the same vein and has succeeded
in antagonizing a good part of the profession by describing as
"conventional wisdom" the orthodox ideas he conceived as impediments
to progress. I suppose that the opposite of conventional wisdom
is enlightened wisdom which, if we possessed it, would certainly help
in the solution of the problems before us. But, in addition to interests
and ideologies, I should like to introduce another range of considerations
that needs to be taken into account. I refer to sheer ignorance.
When one considers the outcome, during the last year or two, of
short-term forecasts undertaken by some of the most respected of our
colleagues both in and out of government it is difficult to resist the
conclusion that there are some things about the functioning of the
economy that we do not yet know. Let me illustrate this point with
another example. What would be the probable effect on the U.S. balance
of payments if we attempted by appropriate fiscal and monetary
measures to attain a 4 per cent unemployment rate by, say, July 1,
1964? It is certainly possible to say something about what would be
involved in sectoral growth rates and to proceed from this to a reasonable
estimate of the effect on commodity imports. One view, held in
respectable quarters, is that such a development would bring with it
an increase in gross national product of about $30 billion (over and
above the growth that would be expected if the percentage of unemployment
did not change) and an increase in commodity imports of