before we can do this we need to analyze output potentials and the
outlook for demand for farm products. The first potential to consider
is land and land use, for after all the land is still the basis for agriculture.
Poultry farms may themselves, it is true, use only a little of it;
but the feed they buy still mostly has to be grown on land somewhere.
Chemical fertilizers can make a given area of land go further in producing
feed and forage, but only within limits.

In recent years one hears occasional statements that make it appear
that the agricultural output of this country is greatly limited by the fact
that it has very little new land to occtupy. I quote exactly from Ronald
Mighell in his American Agriculture, Its Structure and Place in the
Economy (1955), the first volume of a study sponsored by the Social
Science Research Council:

On the supply side, until 1900, the main explanation for expansion was
the continuing occupation and development of new land resources. By
1920, nearly all these possibilities were exhausted except for limited
areas to be developed through irrigation and drainage (p. 6).
This is a valid statement only if the term "new" is given a special definition.


The most extreme example of this is found in the writings of the
American historian, Walter Prescott Webb, of the University of Texas.
He almost tries to make it appear that once this limit of new farm land
and takings was reached about 1920, not only did this nation's great
era of growth come to an end, but also that of most of Europe.1 Webb
fails to comprehend the full meaning of the economic doctrine of the
balance between the extensive and intensive margins; that at least from
1870 on, the intensification of the use of resources behind the frontier
was a larger part of U.S. growth than the extension of the frontier, and
by 1900, much more important. The passing of the frontier in 1920 was
therefore no jolt to the economy whatever. In agriculture, to be specific,
it weighed much less than the effect in the other direction of tractorization
of wheat farming in the Great Plains then underway.
In preparing the materials for the land-use part of its report, the
President's.Materials Policy Commission (P.M.P.C.), commonly called
the Paley Commission, in 1952 drew upon a classification of all the land
in the United States that had just been conlpleted by the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS).2 Of the 478 millions then in cropland, or pastures
in rotation with crops, the SCS concluded that 40 million should
be converted to permanent grassland to prevent further erosion. But it
classified 285 million acres now in permanent Dasture or in woodland as