fewness of firms active in the same industry, or the subjective state of
awareness of the interdependence of price making often characterized
as "conjectural variation," or simply the absence of aggressive competition
for increasing shares, in the market. Others again stress closed
entry, or absence of newcomers' competition, as the essential condition
for a profit level sufficiently comfortable to allow managers to indulge
in the satisfaction of objectives other than maximization of profits.
To combine all these conditions would probably be far too restrictive;
it would confine the application of managerial-discretion models
to large firms with diffused ownership, few competitors, full awareness
of interdependence in pricing, absence of agressive efforts by existing
competitors to increase their market shares, and little danger of new
competitors entering the field. The size of the firm may actually not be
relevant, and diffused ownership may not be a necessary condition for
some deviations from profit maximization to occur, say, in the interest
of larger sales or larger expenditures for staff. Fewness of competitors
may be more significant, chiefly because the danger of newcomers'
competition is likely to be small where the number of firms has been
few and continues to be few; partly also because the few competitors
may have learnt that aggressive price competition does not pay. The
essential conditions, it seems to me, are these two: that no newcomers
are likely to invade the field of the existing firms, and that none of the
existing firms tries to expand its sales at such a fast rate that it could
succeed only by encroaching on the business of its competitors.
Competition from newcomers, from aggressive expansionists, or
from importers is sometimes called "heavy," "vigorous," or "effective.
" The simplest meaning of these adjectival modifiers is this: a firm
is exposed to heavy, vigorous, or effective competition if it is kept
under continuing pressure to do something about its sales and its
profits position. Under this "competitive pressure" the firm is constantly
compelled to react to actual or potential losses in sales and/or
reductions in profits, so much so that the firm will not be able to pursue
any objectives other than the maximization of profits-for the simple
reason that anything less than the highest obtainable profits would
be below the rate of return regarded as normal at the time.
I am aware of a defect in this definition: its criterion is lodged in
the effect rather than in an independently ascertainable condition. Perhaps,
though, "effective" is quite properly defined in this fashion,
namely, by whether certain effects are realized: competition is effective
if it continually depresses profits to the level regarded as the minimum
tolerable. What makes it effective is not part of the definition, but has
to be explained by the conditions of entry, aggressive attitudes on the
part of existing firms, or imports from abroad.
If my reasoning is accepted, several formulations proposed in the