for typical business operations. The normative nature of management
science should be stressed. Several management scientists include operations
research among the agenda of management science. I take this
to mean that the principal techniques of operations research of such
matters as inventory problems, replacement problems, search problems,
queueing problems, and routing problems have to be mastered by
the management scientist. He should, however, make a distinction between
the science and its application: the science deals with typical
systems, but is applied to particular cases.
7. In operations research and consultation, the firm is an actual or
potential client for advice on optimal performance. In this context the
reference is not to the techniques and principles of operations research
but rather to the particular projects planned or undertaken.
8. In accounting theory, the firm is a collection of assets and liabilities.
It should be clear how different this concept is from most of the
others.
9. In legal theory and practice, the firm is a juridical person with
property, claims, and obligations. This may be a very deficient formulation;
I defer to the experts, who will surely correct it.
10. In statistical description (such as the Census of Manufactures)
the firm is a business organization under a single management or a
self-employed person with one or more employees or with an established
place of business. I have adopted here the definition used by the
U.S. Census.
This exercise should have succeeded in showing how ludicrous the
efforts of some writers are to attempt one definition of the firm as used
in economic analysis, or to make statements supposedly true of "the"
firm, or of "its" behavior, or what not. Scholars ought to be aware of
equivocations and should not be snared by them.
A Sense of Proportion
I hope there will be no argument about which concept of the firm is
the most important or the most useful. Since they serve different purposes,
such an argument would be pointless. It would degenerate into
childish claims about one area of study being more useful than another.

I also hope the specialist who uses one concept of the firm will desist
from trying to persuade others to accept his own tried and trusted concept
for entirely different purposes. The concept of the firm in organization
theory, for example, need not at all be suitable for accounting
theory or legal theory; and I know it is not suitable for either competitive
price theory or for oligopoly theory.
Most of the controversies about the "firm" have been due to misunderstandings