In 1776 our venerable master offered clear and emphatic advice to
his countrymen on the proper way to achieve economic prosperity. This
advice was of course directed also to his countrymen in the American
colonies, although at that very moment we were busily establishing
what would now be called a major tax loophole. The main burden of
Smith's advice, as you know, was that the conduct of economic affairs
is best left to private citizens-that the state will be doing remarkably
well if it succeeds in its unavoidable tasks of winning wars, preserving
justice, and maintaining the various highways of commerce.
That was almost two centuries ago, and few modern economists
would assign anything like so austere a role to the economic responsibilities
of the state. The fact that most modern economists are as confident
in prescribing a large economic role to the state as Smith was in
denying such a role is not necessarily surprising: professional opinions
sometimes change after 188 years, and economic and political institutions
are of course even less durable.
But, surprising or not, the shifts in the predominant views of a profession
on public policy pose a question which I wish to discuss. That
question is: on what basis have economists felt themselves equipped to
give useful advice on the proper functions of the state? By what
methods did Smith and his disciples show the incapacity of the state
in economic affairs? By what methods did later economists who favored
state control of railroads, stock exchanges, wage rates and prices, farm
output, and a thousand other things, prove that these were better directed
or operated by the state? How does an economist acquire as
much confidence in the wisdom of a policy of free trade or fiscal stabilization
as he has in the law of diminishing returns or the profit-maximizing
propensities of entrepreneurs?
The thought behind these questions is simple. Economists generally
share the ruling values of their societies, but their professional competence
does not consist in translating popular wishes into an awe-inspiring