same result. Even disregarding the implications for the lower-income
groups, we may find that in at least some of these countries today the
consumption propensities of upper-income groups are far higher and
savings propensities far lower than were those of the more puritanical
upper-income groups of the presently developed countries. Because they
may have proved favorable in the past, it is dangerous to argue that
completely free markets, lack of penalties implicit in progressive taxation,
and the like are indispensable for the economic growth of the now
underdeveloped countries. Under present conditions the results may be
quite the opposite-withdrawal of accumulated assets to relatively
"safe" channels, either by flight abroad or into real estate; and the
inability of governments to serve as basic agents in the kind of capital
formation that is indispensable to economic growth. It is dangerous to
argue that, because in the past foreign investment provided capital
resources to spark satisfactory economic growth in some of the smaller
European countries or in Europe's descendants across the seas, similar
effects can be expected today if only the underdeveloped countries can
be convinced of the need of a "favorable climate." Yet, it is equally
dangerous to take the opposite position and claim that the present problems
are entirely new and that we must devise solutions that are the
product of imagination unrestrained by knowledge of the past, and
therefore full of romantic violence. What we need, and I am afraid it
is but a truism, is a clear perception of past trends and of conditions
under which they occurred, as well as knowledge of the conditions that
characterize the underdeveloped countries today. With this as a beginning,
we can then attempt to translate the elements of a properly understood
past into the conditions of an adequately understood present.
V. Concluding Remarks

In concluding this paper, I am acutely conscious of the meagerness
of reliable information presented. The paper is perhaps 5 per cent
empirical information and 95 per cent speculation, some of it possibly
tainted by wishful thinking. The excuse for building an elaborate structure
on such a shaky foundation is a deep interest in the subject and
a wish to share it with members of the Association. The formal and no
less genuine excuse is that the subject is central to much of economic
analysis and thinking; that our knowledge of it is inadequate; that a
more cogent view of the whole field may help channel our interests and
work in intellectually profitable directions; that speculation is an effective
way of presenting a broad view of the field; and that so long as it
is recognized as a collection of hunches calling for further investigation
rather than a set of fully tested conclusions, little harm and much good
may result.
