propositions for the implications of which they did not have
any sympathy. To mention a single instance: to establish the logical
consistency of the conditions (equations) that are descriptive of a
socialist economy will seem to most people equivalent to gaining a
point for socialism; but it was established by Enrico Barone, a man
who, whatever else he may have been, was certainly no sympathizer
with socialist ideals or groups.

But there exist in our minds preconceptions about the economic
process that are much more dangerous to the cumulative growth of our
knowledge and the scientific character of our analytic endeavors because
they seem beyond our control in a sense in which value judgments
and special pleadings are not. Though mostly allied with these, they
deserve to be separated from them and to be discussed independently.
We shall call them Ideologies.

II

The word ide'ologie was current in France toward the end of the
18th and in the first decade of the 19th century and meant much the
same thing as did the Scottish moral philosophy of the same and an
earlier time or as our own social science in that widest acceptance of
the term in which it includes psychology. Napoleon imparted a derogatory
meaning to it by his sneers at the ideologues-doctrinaire
dreamers without any sense for the realities of politics. Later on, it
was used as it is often used today in order to denote systems of ideas,
that is, in a way in which our distinction between ideologies and
value judgments is lost. We have nothing to do with these or any other
meanings except one that may be most readily introduced by reference
to the "historical materialism" of Marx and Engels. According
to this doctrine, history is determined by the autonomous evolution
of the structure of production: the social and political organization,
religions, morals, arts and sciences are mere "ideological superstructures,
" generated by the economic process.

We neither need nor can go into the merits and demerits of this
conception as such2 of which only one feature is relevant to our purpose.
This feature is the one that has, through various transformations,
developed into the sociology of science of the type associated with the