that in industries of large fixed costs, short-run marginal-cost pricing
would prove disastrous. He concludes his discussion of the concept of
workable competition with the optimistic but guarded "hope that
government need not assume the burden of doing something about
every departure from the model of perfect competition" [12, p. 256].
Nourse in his Price Making in a Democracy [19] assumes that the
structure of industry and the economies of mass production inevitably
give to large firms power over the market; but he believes that if businessmen
can be made to see their long-run interest in sustained profits
and a stable economy, they will deliberately pass on to consumers
in the form of lower prices the gains made possible by advanced technology.
"We can only hope," he says,

that the ultimate intellectual judgment of private businessmen will be
not merely that responsibility is the best policy in the limited terms in
which it has already been put in practice and validated by experience but
also in that broader and more comprehensive interpretation of responsibility
that requires the individual businessman to follow practices that
sustain the sources of general prosperity [19, p. 446].
Despite the treacherous bypaths of monopoly and the pitfalls of shortrun
profits, Nourse looks to the "invisible hand" to harness the selfishness
of the leaders of corporate enterprise and direct it to the general
good. As he expresses it, "Adam Smith's recognition of self-interest as
a perennial and dependable spring of human conduct is as true today
as it was in his time" [19, p. 449].

Galbraith [13], while in agreement with Nourse that the economies
of mass production make inevitable an industrial organization that if
not checked places monopoly power in the hands of businessmen, does
not look to the wisdom and restraint of those who have power to insure
that they will not misuse it. On the contrary he thinks that power
over the market tends to breed a countervailing power that will limit
the original power so that it can do no public harm. Where countervailing
power does not spontaneously develop, it is the government's
duty to create it. Galbraith envisages eventually a society made up
wholly of power blocs arrayed against each other, and he relies on their
conflicting interests to promote the public welfare.
Schumpeter [24] believed that the essence of modern capitalism
is its dynamic character. Forces inherent in it are constantly undermining
any strategic advantage that a monopoly may temporarily
acquire. Better processes and products are constantly replacing those
that may be temporarily monopolized. Temporary monopoly itself
promotes the general welfare, for it gives a security to investments
without which they might not be made. The "perennial gale of creative