industries, such differences tend to be more or less symmetrically distributed
around the "normal" values which we have found in the given
years for manufacturing as a whole.

A further analysis of the plus and minus deviations offers interesting
suggestions. We would expect industries characterized by monopoly
and by highly imperfect competition to have a value product which
would be appreciably greater than that which we would expect from
the production formula itself, and from the quantities of labor and
capital which are available. This would be caused by the control over
supplies and prices exercised by the dominant firms and by their
ability to control or to limit entrance into the monopolized industries.
Conversely, in the industries which may be characterized by "excessive"
competition into which large numbers of workers and also in
some cases, relatively large quantities of capital are forced and which
consequently lower the marginal productivity of one or both factors
appreciably below their general levels, we would expect the value product
per unit of labor and possibly also of capital, to be below the general
average for society as a whole.

Similarly, we would expect that the industries which are rapidly
expanding because of an increase in demand or in the disposition of
consumers income, or because of great technical progress, will have
value products which are in excess of those derived from the formula.
Conversely, again, we would expect that the contracting industries,
which are suffering from a decrease in demand and an obsolescence of
technique, would produce less value product than that which our
formula would predict.

There are, moreover, a considerable number of industries which
probably can best be described as "sweated." These are industries
which have had large supplies of cheap labor, sometimes caused, as in
the past, by an influx of immigrants or by the presence of a large number
of women and juveniles who are forced to seek work because of
the low earnings of the male heads of households. The average earnings
in these industries tends to be appreciably below the national average,
and if there is a normal degree of competition at work, these low earnings
will commonly be translated into a lower sales price for the product
than would normally be the case. The value product in these industries
will, therefore, tend to be less than what would be shown under the
formula for manufacturing as a whole.

We can test the relative truth of these hypotheses both by statistical
analysis and also by identifying the specific industries where the deviations
of the actual from the theoretical values are great. In analyzing
the American deviations by years, as in Table VII, certain marked