meanings is intended. I have also endeavored to bring into clearer view
a few truths that are too often obscured by loose thinking and speaking.
If time permitted, I should like to explore the subject much further:
to examine the impact of the present war on consumption and living
levels and standards, in the United States and other countries, and to
try to forecast the types of readjustment to be expected; to consider
some difficult problems of measurement, and the possibilites of deriving
significant indexes of planes of living; to inquire how far inter-group
and international differences in levels or standards are normal and
should persist, and to what degree steps toward what is miscalled
"equalization" are desirable and feasible; to elucidate further the
interrelationship between levels and standards, and changes in standards
themselves; to analyze some promising techniques for improving
the plane or content of living where it is especially low or restricted;
and to reappraise standards of living in the Western World in the light
of world population trends.
These are some of the targets within range. I have ammunition to
spare, and am eager to test my markmanship further. But the order to
cease firing is about to be given, and I must conclude with a brief statement
of faith.
Improving planes and content of living, with due respect to varied
needs and preferences, is an eminently practical and wholesome overall
objective of individual ambition and of national and international
policy. Achievement of such improvement is no mere humanitarian
dream. It is basic to attaining fuller utilization of available resources,
hence of serious concern to economists. It is fundamental to the maintenance
of peace and orderly political progress, hence of serious concern
to political scientists as well.
Amid the strains and drains of war, it has been borne in upon us
that the world's productive powers are far larger than had been realized.
We are raising our sights and extending our range. Despite appalling
wastes and devastation, most of the vast accumulations of the ages
remain for widening use. Depletion of exhaustible resources has been
more than offset by new discoveries and techniques of substitution. Wartime
pressures have compelled learning new arts and stimulated effective
research into better means of satisfying wants for essentials, comforts,
and luxuries. Science, technology, and management have achieved
near-miracles, and many more are in the offing. Increased mobility and
better communications facilitate co'operation over great distances.
New machinery for international operation is under construction.
We have much to learn and far to go before we shall attain the
understanding and master the techniques of social engineering that