For there is but one system of the world and Newton was the one who
found it. Similarly, there is but one grand concept of general equi-
librium and it was Walras who had the insight (and luck) to find it.
I ought to add that this rating by Schumpeter deserves more credit,
coming in 1935, than it would coming today. For it had predictive
value as to what was to happen to our professional writings. Back in
1935, Marshall was still propped up on his throne and in large parts of
the world even the zealots of the mathematical method tended to look
upon Walras merely as the predecessor of the great Pareto. The bourse
for professional reputations shows changing price fluctuations: if at
one time Allred Marshall was overpraised and quoted at an inflated
price which left little of consumer's surplus to the buyer, he had to
pay for this by later being sold at an overdiscount-as will become
evident.
Since I ought not to leave you waiting for the other shoes to drop,
I hasten to name the other Frenchmen. One is Cournot, a choice that
will not seem too surprising. Certainly there is a professional compe-
tence about the 1838 Cournot, in the field of partial equilibrium, mo-
nopoly and oligopoly, that the modern literature only reattained by
1930. (Think only of the rediscovery in this century of the concept
of marginal revenue!) I do not know that the name of Schumpeter's
final giant will seem so obvious a choice. It is Frangois Quesnay, who
is deemed to be great on account of his cryptic Tableau and anticipa-
tion of the circular flow of economic life. Back in the days before
Leontief and the resurrection of Karl Marx's Volume 2 model of circu-
lar reproduction, I thought this last choice even more far-fetched than
I do today.
II. The Pecking-Order of Analysts
I need not labor the point farther. Within economics, we economists
rate writers of the past in a quite different order than does the outside
world. And, as far as economic analysis itself is concerned, the present
generation of economists gives a quite different ranking than did ear-
lier generations of economists.'
Now I am not really concerned here with the history of pure theory
and the changing fortunes of different writers. A critic can rightly
argue that Gide and Rist were writing a history of economic doctriines,
while Schumpeter was writing a history of economic analysis; and
hence I ought not to be surprised if there turns out to be a consider-
able difference in emphasis. Who would want to deny that Cournot,