through proficiencies that lie definitely within the training
and interest of the political scientist. He must work out a scheme of
organizational representation by which rights of expression and negotiation
may be delegated and responsibly exercised, with information
as to results attained brought back to the individual members of the
group to illuminate and improve their future understanding of their
own real interest and of the means of attaining it.
The "organization expert" of today has some of these proficiencies,
but he is preoccupied with essentially operative devices for securing
discipline and coo6rdination within a company. Broader professional
training is needed to develop expertness in defining efficacious ways
for the parties within a given enterprise to express their interest in
functionally significant terms. We need to get beyond such crude
concepts as that sometimes voiced in the claim that labor should have
a voice "equal" to that of capital in management. The attempt to define
equality for noncomparables must give place to the search for a workable
pattern of bargaining relationships by the parties whose roles
are widely different but mutually indispensable.
The political scientist in the business field must also aid in discovering
suitable means for federating or otherwise incorporating small
units into larger ones so that some decisions may be taken on the
basis of the small areas to which they are pertinent, and others on
issues regional, national, or even international in scope. Every such
organizational structure must be relative to the economic content of the
issues to be faced and the determinations to be made. Thus, as was
said above, political scientist and economist must conduct their
studies jointly at every stage of their work.
The economist, however, has his distinctive tasks as analyst of the
economic content of the company's or the association's affairs. Given
a scheme of representative business organization designed to see that
the actually felt interests of the parties to economic life have a chance
for realistic expression, their choices should then be made in the light
of knowledge both as to the facts by which they are confronted and
the effects which may be expected to follow from any proposed line of
action. Let us assume that the fact-finding agencies of government and
the record-keeping departments of the participating groups provide
as good a body of data as it is possible or practicable to collect and
that all parties are frank in divulging their information. It then becomes
the professional task of the economist to analyze these data with
the best methodological tools to give answers to the questions which
the negotiating interest groups need to put to the data. While the
interest group with which the economist is professionally associated
furnishes the highly necessary worm's-eye view of its interest, the
economist must supplement this with a bird's-eye view of the total