Let me add two final comments. The first bears upon the importance
of additional knowledge and a better view of the secular structure of
personal income distribution. Since this distribution is a focal point at
which the functioning of the economic system impinges upon the human
beings who are the living members of society and for whom and through
whom the society operates, it is an important datum for understanding
the reactions and behavior patterns of human beings as producers, consumers,
and savers. It follows that better knowledge and comprehension
of the subject are indispensable, not only in and of itself but also as
a step in learning more about the functioning of society-in both the
long and short run. Without better knowledge of the trends in secular
income structure and of the factors that determine them, our understanding
of the whole process of economic growth is limited; and any
insight we may derive from observing changes in countrywide aggregates
over time will be defective if these changes are not translated into
movements of shares of the various income groups.
But more than that, such knowledge will contribute to a better evaluation
of past and present theorizing on the subject of economic growth.
It was pointed out in the opening lines of this paper that the field is distinguished
by looseness of concepts, extreme scarcity of relevant data,
and, particularly, pressures of strongly held opinions. The distribution
of national product among the various groups is a subject of acute interest
to many and is discussed at length in any half-articulate society.
When empirical data are scanty, as they are in this field, the natural
tendency in such discussion is to generalize from what little experience
is available-most often the short stretch of historical experience within
the horizon of the interested scholar, which is brought to bear upon the
particular policy problems in the forefront. It has repeatedly been observed
that the grand dynamic economics of the classical school of the
late 18th and early 19th centuries was a generalization, the main empirical
contents of which were the observed developments during half to
three quarters of a century in England, the mother country of that
school; and that it bore many of the limitations which the brevity and
exceptional character of that period and that place naturally imposed
upon the theoretical structure. It is also possible that much of Marxian
economics may be an overgeneralization of imperfectly understood
trends in England during the first half of the 19th century when income
inequality may have widened; and that extrapolations of these trends
(e.g., increasing misery of the working classes, polarization of society,
etc.) proved wrong because due regard was not given to the possible
effects upon the economic and social structure of technological changes,
extension of the economic system to much of the then unoccupied world,
and the very structure of human wants. Wider empirical foundations,