V. The Growth of World Trade Since the War: The Case of the
Industrial Countries
I now come to the third wave of world-wide integration or reintegration
during the postwar period.
Since the end of the war, especially since 1948, world trade has
grown very rapidly. World exports rose from some $54 billion in 1948
to over $140 billion in mid-1963, and for the decade 1950-60 the compound
rate of growth of the volume of world exports was about 6 per
cent a year.' It seems that for the first time in almost a hundred years
world trade has grown faster than world production for a period of
more than ten years. I mention this fact for two reasons, first, to convey
an idea of the rapidity of the growth and, second, because so much
has been made of the alleged fact that since the late nineteenth century
international trade has in most countries grown less fast than national
income. You will remwember that years ago Werner Sombart tried to
establish a "historical law" of the "declining importance of international
trade."10 This alleged tendency has held a strange fascination for
many economists.'1 But I myself cannot see much importance in this
particular criterion. Whether trade has grown somewhat more or less
fast than GNP is hardly very significant unless the divergence is very
pronounced as it was in the 1930's. Here again the contours of the
trend have been blurred by the singular events of the Great Depression.
"
The rapid rise in world trade is the consequence of, but has also
powerfully contributed to, the rapid growth of world production. The
perlormance with respect to growth and stability of the majority of
national economies of the world has, on the whole, been satisfactorynot
in an absolute sense of perfection, but satisfactory compared first
with earlier periods (not only the definitely unsatisfactory interwar
period), compared secondly with what was expected by many economists
20 years ago, and compared thirdly, I dare say, with what one
In average of 1955-60 prices. See [4] [221.
10 "Die These von der abnehrnendeni Bedeutung der interniationalen Handelsbeziehungen"
or "der fallenden Export quote," Werner Sombart in [20, pp. 368-71].
" See [16] for a good, brief discussion and references to the recent literature.
12 Lipsey [11, p. 441 found that as far as the United States is concerned "over the whole
period [1879-1960] the only suggestion of a downward trend in the ratio of the quantity of
trade to output was the low interwar export and postwar import ratios. Both now appear
to have been temporary." Lipsey reached his results by using constant dollar rather than
current value trade figures. The difference between current and deflated dollar value ratios of
trade and output stems from the fact that both export and import prices have fallen in the
long run compared with domestic prices. Hence a different deflator has to be used for the
two iteims of the ratio. If "invisible" exports and imports could be added to merchandise
trade, the statistical support for the theory of the declining trade-GNP ratio would be
further weakened.