cals such as the Spectator, the Tatler, and the Guardian, influential in
both politics and literature. It was in the eighteenth century that Lord
Mansfield, Chief Justice of England, organized the commercial law
of Great Britain and introduced important innovations in legal practice.
It was in the eighteenth century that Sir William Blackstone
wrote his Commentaries, which remained a leading legal textbook until
our own century. In philanthropy James Oglethorpe promoted his
scheme for colonizing Georgia with condemned criminals, confident
that a wholesome environment would make of them wholesome citizens.
The eighteenth century witnessed the beginnings of prison reform under
the leadership of John Howard and the movement to protect children
from exploitation, led by Jonas Hanway.
Stephen Hales, regarded as the father of plant physiology; John
Roebuck, who introduced the use of lead condensing chambers in
making sulphuric acid; Henry Cavendish, the discover of hydrogen as
a chemical element, the first to combine hydrogen and oxygen to make
water, and the first to devise an accurate method of weighing the earth;
and John Priestley, the first to discover the decomposition of ammonia
by electricity and the first to describe the properties of ammonia,
nitrous acid, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, and carbon monoxide-
all were eighteenth-century scientists. Their achievements in
these various fields manifested a spirit of individualism that strongly
marked the whole of eighteenth-century England. Finally, what Mitchell
called government by public discussion replaced the arbitrary and often
irresponsible rule of sovereigns. In Parliament, in vestry meetings, in
drawing rooms and social clubs, in coffee houses and taverns, people
discusseed public issues in a lively and critical manner. In these forums
a public opinion crystallized, influential in both political and economic
affairs. The eighteenth century in England was truly a century in
which individualism was a mass phenomenon. The English historian
G. M. Trevelyan has aptly characterized it as "an age of aristocracy
and liberty . . . of individual initiative and institutional decay . . . of
creative vigor in all the trades and arts that serve and adorn the life of
man" [28, p. 339].
It was in this social milieu, this institutional matrix, that the father
of political economy conceived his philosophy that the way to maximize
national income and promote national welfare was to leave individuals
unhampered in their economic activity, free to choose their own occupations
without the restrictions of a socially enforced apprenticeship,
free to organize and operate business enterprise without state subsidies
or state direction, and free to buy and sell in any market without
interference from local and national governments.
In short, Smith's economic liberalism, "seeking to vindicate the