of "nonproduction workers," who approximate the white-collar
group, declined only 3 per cent. This sort of difference has been characteristic
of recessions generally, not only the most recent episode, and
on a smaller scale it has also been characteristic of industry generally,
not only of manufacturing.

It appears, therefore, that changes in the occupational structure of
the labor force, if not also in the industrial structure, have been tending
of late to loosen the links which, over a considerable part of our economic
history, tied the short-run movement of total employment rather
firmly to the cyclical movement of total production, and especially to
the cyclical movement of its most unstable parts-that is, the activities
of manufacturing, mining, construction, and freight transportation.
This stabilizing tendency promises well for the future, although up to
the present it has not left a mark on records of aggregate employment
that is comparable with the imprint that the stabilizing influences we
discussed previously have left on personal income. In the postwar period,
as over a longer past, the number of men and women at work, and
even more the aggregate of hours worked by them, has continued to
move in fairly close sympathy with the fluctuations of production.
We can no longer justifiably suppose, however, when employment
falls 2 million during a recession, as it did between July 1957 and July
1958, that the number of people who receive an income has declined by
any such figure. In fact, the number of workers drawing unemployment
insurance under the several regular plans rose about 1.3 million during
these twelve months, while the number of retired workers on public
pensions rose another million. Hence, it may be conservatively estimated
that the number of income recipients increased over 300 thousand
despite the recession. In the other postwar recessions our experience
was fairly similar. In other words, as a result of some of the structural
changes on which I dwelt earlier, the size of the income-receiving population
has grown steadily and escaped cyclical fluctuations entirely.'
III

Turning next to consumer spending, we must try once again to see
recent developments in historical perspective. The fact that stands out
is that the impact of business cycles on consumption has recently diminished,
while the effects of consumption on the business cycle have
become more decisive.

In the classical business cycle, as we came to know it in this country,