qualifications.'3 Nevertheless, both the magnitude and the rate of increase
of this form of human capital have been such that they could be
an important key to the riddle of economic growth."4
The exciting work under way is on the return to education. In spite
of the flood of high school and college graduates, the return has not
become trivial. Even the lower limits of the estimates show that the return
to such education has been in the neighborhood of the return to
nonhuman capital. This is what most of these estimates show when they
treat as costs all of the public and private expenditures on education
and also the income foregone while attending school, and when they
treat all of these costs as investment, allocating none to consumption.'5
But surely a part of these costs are consumption in the sense that education
creates a form of consumer capital'6 which has the attribute of
" From [19, Sec. 4]. These estimates of the stock of education are tentative and incomplete.
They are incomplete in that they do not take into account fully the increases
in the average life of this form of human capital arising out of the fact that relatively  more of this education is held by younger people in the labor force than was true in earlier
years; and, they are incomplete because no adjustment has been made for the improvements
in education over time, increasing the quality of a year of school in ways other than
those related to changes in the proportions represented by elementary, high school and
higher education. Even so the stock of this form of human capital rose 8.5 times between
1900 and 1956 while the stock of reproducible nonhuman capital increased only 4.5 times,
both in constant 1956 prices.

14 In value terms this stock of education was only 22 per cent as large as the stock of
reproducible physical capital in 1900, whereas in 1956 it already had become 42 per cent
as large.

15 Several comments are called for here. (1) The return to high school education appears
to have declined substantially between the late 'thirties and early 'fifties and since then
has leveled off, perhaps even risen somewhat, indicating a rate of return toward the end
of the 'fifties about as high as that to higher education. (2) The return to college education
seems to have risen somewhat since the late 'thirties in spite of the rapid influx of collegetrained
individuals into the labor force. (3) Becker's estimates based on the difference in
income between high school and college graduates based on urban males adjusted for
ability, race, unemployment and mortality show a return of 9 per cent to total college
costs including both earnings foregone and conventional college costs, public and private
and with none of these costs allocated to consumption (see his paper given at the American
Economic Association meeting, December 1959 [2]). (4) The returns to this education
in the case of nonwhite urban males, of rural males, and of females in the labor force
may have been somewhat lower (see Becker r2]). (5) Mly own estimates, admittedly less
complete than those of Becker and thus subject to additional qualifications, based mainly
on lifetime income estimates of Herman P. Miller [12], lead to a return of about 11 per
cent to both high school and college education as of 1958. See [19, Sec. 51.
Whether the consumption component in education will ultimately dominate, in the
sense that the investment component in education will diminish as these expenditures increase
and a point will be reached where additional expenditures for education will be
pure consumption (a zero return on however small a part one might treat as an investment)
, is an interesting speculation. This may come to pass, as it has in the case of food
and shelter, but that eventuality appears very remote presently in view of the prevailing
investment value of education and the new demands for knowledge and skill inherent in
the nature of our technical and economic progress.
"The returns on this consumer capital will not appear in the wages and salaries that
people earn.
