all events by distinctive strategies, that is largely responsible for
keeping selfish interests in most cases within relatively reasonable
bounds. There are, of course, fundamental issues of principle that call
for uncompromising statesmanship, impervious to the temptations of
political maneuvering. The maintenance of government as the servant
of the people, through vigilant avoidance of policies calculated to
transform the state into their master, constitutes the most outstanding
of these issues and comprehends numerous matters of principle where
political concessions are dangerous. Happily we have resisted the lure
of totalitarianism even under the terrific pressures of the great economic
breakdown and the unprecedented upheaval of world war; and with
the complete military defeat of the fascist powers the climate of opinion
is more inhospitable than ever to the enthronement of dictatorial
authority. In most economic matters, however, there is ample room for
accommodation of conflicting interests and conflicting viewpoints; and
the pragmatic compromises of politics produce such accommodation.
Politics thus serves as a cementing rather than divisive influence in our
national life. Head-on collisions between powerful interests and extreme
ideologies are thereby averted, and opportunity is afforded for resort
to limited and tentative expedients, often instituted on an experimental
basis, which are subject to progressive modification as practical
circumstances may require. The trial-and-error methods by which the
Interstate Commerce act and the interpretation and application of its
provisions have been evolved over a, period of almost six decades furnish
a striking illustration of this pragmatic approach; and similar methods
have characterized for the most part the development of control policies
in all spheres of economic activity. Needed change may be somewhat
retarded in this way, but it tends to assume the form of much more
orderly and realistic adjustments than if pursued as a quest for
uncompromising ends, to be effectuated in full-blown maturity by single
impulse. In this fashion the very political activity which is so often
feared and so generally condemned has contributed significantly,
despite the accumulation of controls, to the preservation of the essential
attributes of the system of private capitalism.

VI

But perhaps the most common alarm over the influence being
exerted upon the system of private enterprise by the development of
public control finds expression in the contention that we are relinquishing
our liberties to an all-pervading "bureaucracy." This characterization
of governmental policies as bureaucracy is obviously a mere use
of epithet, designed to cast discredit upon existing and proposed control
measures, rather than an objective description of regulatory procedures.