of savings upon upper-income shares is legislative interference
and "political" decisions. These may be aimed at limiting the
cumulation of property directly through inheritance taxes and other
explicit capital levies. They may produce similar effects indirectly,
e.g., by government-permitted or -induced inflation which reduces the
economic value of accumulated wealth stored in fixed-price securities
or other properties not fully responsive to price changes; or by legal
restriction of the yield on accumulated property, as happened recently
in the form of rent controls or of artificially low long-term interest rates
maintained by the government to protect the market for its own bonds.
To discuss this complex of processes is beyond the competence of
this paper, but its existence and possible wide effect should be noted
and one point emphasized. All these interventions, even when not
directly aimed at limiting the effects of accumulation of past savings
in the hands of the few, do reflect the view of society on the long-term
utility of wide income inequalities. This view is a vital force that would
operate in democratic societies even if there were no other counteracting
factors. This should be borne in mind in connection with changes in
this view even in developed countries, which result from the process of
growth and constitute a re-evaluation of the need for income inequalities
as a source of savings for economic growth. The result of
such changes would be an increasing pressure of legal and political
decisions on upper-income shares-increasing as a country moves to
higher economic levels.

We turn to three other, less obvious groups of factors countervailing
the cumulative effects of concentration of savings. The first is demographic.
In the presently developed countries there have been differential
rates of increase between the rich and the poor-family control
having first spread to the former. Hence, even disregarding migration,
one can argue that the top 5 per cent of 1870 and its descendants
would account for a significantly smaller percentage of the population
in 1920. This is even more likely in a country like the United
States with its substantial immigration-usually entering the income
distribution at the lower-income levels; and may be less likely in a
country from which the poor have emigrated. The top 5 per cent of
population in 1920 is, therefore, comprised only partly of the descendants
of the top 5. per cent of 1870; perhaps half or a larger
fraction must have originated in the lower-income brackets of 1870.
This means that the period during which effects of concentration of
savings can be assumed to have cumulated to raise the income share
of any given fixed ordinal group (whether it be the top 1, 5, or 10 per
cent of the population) is much shorter than the fifty years in the
span; and hence these effects are much weaker than they would have