gain in what makes up the other three-fourths of their family budgets
would add 18 per cent to it. As for farm families, in general they do
not spend as much as city families on fancy living, but still the nonfoods
make up clearly the larger part of their living.

There is, however, an interdependency of agriculture and the rest
of the nation more important than all of the foregoing. This comes in'
wartime. The wars in which our country becomes involved now are
world wars, and in these it has to provide large quantities of food for
the fighting forces and peoples of its allies. Our agriculture must stand
ready to meet these needs. It was able to do this in the last world war
only because of a large backlog of production potential and even surpluses
already produced. Then came the immediate postwar years of
relief and rehabilitation of our allies. The United States rendered a
great service to the Free World in 1940-48. But when the rehabilitation
is over, there is excess production and there are sharp breaks in
prices. This country cannot maintain an agriculture ready to expand
as needed during the wars and rehabilitations without surpluses at
their end. We can do a better job than we have of getting ready for the
readjustment. But still we cannot let agriculture suffer alone at such
times as now. We must help it get readjusted.

In tlle proposals for the three phases which follow there is nothing
that has not been proposed before, although there is a good bit that has
been proposed but never adopted. Any hope that someone will come
up with a bralnd new scheme that will solve the agricultural problem
is fantastic. What is needed mostly is a properly balanced and integrated
combination of lines of action already being followed. In this
balancing, however, somie very large changes in emphasis are needed.
The Emergency Phase

The jam into which this nation has got its agriculture is simply that
the combination of price supports and production control as it has
been set up and operating has given us a larger and larger output
instead of reducing output to a level in line with the prices set. Or it
may have reduced the output of a particular basic crop, only to
increase greatly the output of substitute nonbasic products. In short,
production control has very largely broken down and either the stocks
of the basic products have reached almost unmanageable proportions
or the supplies of the substitute products have increased till their prices
are already somewhat low. Unless drastic measures are taken the
stocks will become still larger and larger and the prices of substitute
farm products will sink lower and lower. Very few farmers are in
desperate straits yet because of the price declines. Farm earnings
were high in 1951 to 1953, not to mention 1946 to 1948 earlier, and