and some believe his greatest fame in pure economics lies in his attempted
analysis of "surplus value." Although he promised to clear up
the contradiction between "price" and "value" in later volumes, neither
he nor Engels ever made good this claim. On this topic the goodhumored
and fair criticisms of Wicksteed and Bdhm-Bawerk have
never been successfully rebutted: the contradictions and muddles in
Marx's mind must not be confused with the contradictions and muddles
in the real world.

Marx, like any man of keen intellect, liked a good problem; but he
did not labor over a labor theory of value in order to give us moderns
scope to use matrix theory on the "transformation" problem. He
wanted to have a theory of exploitation, and a basis for his prediction
that capitalism would in some sense impoverish the workers and pave
the way for revolution into a new stage of society. As the optimism of
the American economist Henry Carey shows, a labor theory of value
when combined with technological change is, on all but the most extreme
assumptions, going to lead to a great increase in real wages and
standards of living. So the element of exploitation had to be worked
hard. Here Marx might have emphasized the monopoly elements of
distribution: how wicked capitalists, possessed of the nonlabor tools
that are essential to high production, allegedly gang up on the workers
and make them work for a minimum. Or, were it not for his amazing
hatred toward Malthus and his theory of population, Marx might have
kept wages dismal by virtue of biological conditions of labor supply.
The monopoly explanation he did not use, perhaps because he wanted
to let capitalism choose its own weapons and assume ruthless competition,
and still be able to show it up. Marx tried to demonstrate the
same dramatic minimum character of real wages by means of his concept
of the "reserve army of the unemployed."

Here is the real Achilles' heel of the Marxian theory of distribution
and its implied prophecies of immiserization of the working classes.
Under perfect competition, technical change will raise real wages unless
the changes are so labor-saving as to raise the rate of maintainable
profit immensely; Joan Robilnson and others have pointed out how
contradictory is Marx's notion that both profit rates and real wages
can fall once Marx jettisons Ricardo's emphasis on the scarcity of land
and the law of diminishing returns. Marx simply has no statical theory
of the reserve army. If an appeal is made to a vague dynamic theory
of technological displacement or recruitment from the country, close
analysis will suggest that Marx (like Mill) was a very bad econometrician
of his times, not realizing how much real wages in Western Europe
had been raised by new techniques and eqtuipment; and he was a
bad theorist because his kind of model would almost certainly lead