cooperation between such given units; it is no agency for improving
tastes (wants) or manners or especially for conferring productive
capacity to meet wants or needs; it will not redistribute capacity and
hence product, to accord better than the realities do with any norm of
ideal justice. Business relations clearly do work to dissolve clannishness
and dogmatic allegiances, and to promote tolerance, and a degree of
generosity. But in the distribution of economic resources atomistic
motivation tends powerfully toward cumulatively increasing inequality.
For all productive capacity-whether owned "property" or personal
qualities-is essentially "capital," a joint creation of pre-existing capacity
(or the result of "accident"). And those who already have more
capacity are always in a better position to acquire still more, with the
same effort and sacrifice. This applies about as much to personal
capacity as to property, though the latter is a more convenient way
of passing on "unearned" advantage to heirs or successors. It is a gross
injustice-by one of several conflicting norms of justice generally
accepted in liberal society. But it is also the main reliance for the
motivation of accumulation in all forms, hence of progress, all forms
of which are directly or indirectly dependent on means and their economical
use. And the tendency goes on beyond the individual life,
from generation to generation, through the family and transmission of
advantages. It is modified but hardly mitigated, and certainly not
simplified, by the large element of "luck" in human affairs. Any serious
effort to interfere with the process would weaken the family in other
connections, and if it were replaced by some other primary group, the
anti-equalitarian tendency might still be as strong.

No doubt we all agree that extremes of wealth and poverty are unjust,
especially when they do not correspond with personal effort or
sacrifice-and are bad in other ways. The question is, what can we
do about it? Can the rules of the economic game be so changed that
the winnings, symbolic and real (and the former are not much inferior
in importance) will accord better with some accepted or defensible
criterion of justice? And can it be done without wrecking the game
itself, as a game, and as a producer of the fruits on which we all live?
The intricate conflict of values here cannot be spelled out in detailfreedom
with order, efficiency and progress, interesting activity, but
especially freedom versus justice. The ancient provision against misery
was to stress as sacred the obligations of family and neighborhood, and
"charity," alms-giving, by those having an excess over "needs." But in
the main, men were told and conditioned to believe that somehow
everything is really for the best, and the evils of life have to be borne