unplanned. Some resulted from efforts to control the business cycle
while others originated in policies aimed at different ends. Some arose
from private and others from public activities. Some are of very
recent origin and others of long standing. The net result has been that
the intensity of cyclical swings of production has become smaller. The
links that previously tied together the cyclical movements of production,
employment, personal income, and consumption have become
looser. And, as everyone knows, the once familiar parallelism of the
short-term movements in the physical volume of total production, on
the one hand, and the average level of wholesale or consumer prices, on
the other, has become somewhat elusive.
To be sure, special factors of an episodic character played their
part in recent business cycles, as they always have. For example, a
pent-up demand for civilian goods was highly significant in checking
the recession of 1945. The tax reduction legislated in April 1948 helped
to moderate the recession which began towards the end of that year.
The tax cuts announced soon after business activity began receding
in 1953 merely required executive acquiescence in legislation that had
been passed before any recession was in sight. Again, the sputniks
spurred the government's response to the recession of 1957-58. Special
circumstances such as these undoubtedly weakened the forces of economic
contraction at certain times; but they also strengthened them at
other times. In particular, governmental purchases from private firms
have not infrequently been an unsettling influence rather than a stabilizing
force. We need only recall the drop of federal expenditure on
commodities and services from an annual rate of $91 billion in the early
months of 1945 to $16 billion two years later, or the fall from $59 billion
to $44 billion soon after the Korean hostilities came to a close. The
ability of our economy to adjust to such major disturbances without experiencing
a severe or protracted slump testifies not only to our good
luck; it testifies also to the stabilizing power of the structural changes
that I have emphasized.
It seems reasonable to expect that the structural changes in our economy,
which have recently served to moderate and humanize the business
cycle, will continue to do so. The growth of corporations is not
likely to be checked, nor is the tendency to pay fairly stable dividends
likely to be modified. The scale of governmental activities will remain
very extensive, and so it would be even if the communist threat to our
national security were somehow banished. Our methods of taxation
might change materially, but the income tax will remain a major source
of governmental revenue. Governmental expenditures might fluctuate
sharply, but they are not likely to decline during a recession merely