these variations, it will set in train longer term effects that will make
any monetary growth path it follows ultimately consistent with the rule
of policy. The actual course of monetary growth will be analogous to a
random walk, buffeted this way and that by the forces that produce
temporary departures of the market rate from the natural rate.
To state this conclusion differently, there is always a temporary
trade-off between inflation and unemployment; there is no permanent
trade-off. The temporary trade-off comes not from inflation per se, but
from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from a rising rate
of inflation. The widespread belief that there is a perma ient trade-off
is a sophisticated version of the confusion between "high" and "rising"
that we all recognize in simpler forms. A rising rate of inflation may
reduce unemployment, a high rate will not.

But how long, you will say, is "temporary"? For interest rates, we
have some systematic evidence on how long each of the several effects
takes to work itself out. For unemployment, we do not. I can at most
venture a personal judgment, based on some examination of the historical
evidence, that the initial effects of a higher and unanticipated rate
of inflation last for something like two to five years; that this initial
effect then begins to be reversed; and that a full adjustment to the new
rate of inflation takes about as long for employment as for interest
rates, say, a couple of decades. For both interest rates and employment,
let me add a qualification. These estimates are for changes in the rate
of inflation of the order of magnitude that has been experienced in the
United States. For much more sizable changes, such as those experienced
in South American countries, the whole adjustment process is
greatly speeded up.

To state the general conclusion still differently, the monetary authority
controls nominal quantities-directly, the quantity of its own liabilities.
In principle, it can use this control to peg a nominal quantity-an
exchange rate, the price level, the nominal level of national income, the
quantity of motney by one or another definition-or to peg the rate of
change in a nominal quantity-the rate of inflation or deflation, the
rate of growth or decline in nominal national income, the rate of growth
of the quantity of money. It cannot use its control over nominal quantities
to peg a real quantity-the real rate of interest, the rate of unemployment,
the level of real national income, the real quantity of money,
the rate of growth of real national income, or the rate of growth of the
real quantity of money.

II. What Monetary Policy Can Do

Monetary policy cannot peg these real magnitudes at predetermined
levels. But monetary policy can and does have important effects on
these real magnitudes. The one is in no way inconsistent with the other.