social disaster. Monopoly is another evil, though the public misconceives
its nature and grossly exaggerates the extent and power of business
monopolies. A majority of producers and dealers have some
short-run monopoly position; but in general, monopoly is temporary
and functional, on the same principle as patent-rights. Protective duties
foster monopoly; but where monopoly really bites is in the legal
brigandage of organized wage-earners and farmers. The business interest
itself is far more dangerous to free society through political action
as a pressure group; but it stands no chance in competition with voting
masses "agitated" and organized for power and plunder-all the worse
for their self-righteous motivation. Obviously, anything like nation-wide
collective bargaining and striking is coercion of the country, not of
any opposed economic interest; and as noted, the heaviest cost falls
on other "workers," especially those still weaker. (Perhaps I should
use a more polite word; but I said I would exploit the privilege of age
to put truth ahead of manners; and what does anyone, including the
"honest brigand" want but his "rights," to be judge of his own case
and have coercive power to enforce his own verdict?)
Far more important than all the mechanical imperfections of "market
competition" (the real ones, not created by stupid or unwise public
action) are limitations of the principle of economic freedom inherent
in unalterable conditions of life and associative action. Our economic
ills are not due to the failure of competition; on the contrary, the result
of perfect functioning of the system would be socially quite intolerable.
The free market, with reasonable help from state authority, can make
tolerable provision for the economic cooperation of individuals and
other "units," as far as it is "cooperation," as far as their interests
are mutual. By the same argument it can not solve any other problems,
and there are many other and grave problems that insistently call for
solution. So in other fields: free association will solve the problems "up
to a point," but not completely or by itself. Social problems are not
only hard but finally insoluble. Yet many of them will inevitably get
some kind of "treatment"; it is a question of better or worse, or of
making things better, more or less, or making them worse than before,
even to downright disaster. As I remember hearing "Tommy" Adams
say in a classroom, we must not call any problems insoluble which must
be solved in some way and for which some solutions are better, or
worse, than others.

The most serious limitations of the free-market economy, and major
problems set by it, arise from the fact that it takes the "units," individuals,
families, etc., as "given," which is entirely unrealistic. In the
economic aspect specifically, it "assumes" given "wants, resources and
technique," in possession of each and all. The market is an agency of