in relation thereto, will continue to receive-as they
should-a great deal of attention in public policy.
For some decades economists have devoted much attention to the
government's responsibilities in relation to business stability and full
employment, inflation and depression. Related are the government's
control of the currency and its influence upon the volume of credit and
the general level of the economy. More recent, but widespread, is interest
in the factors promoting or retarding economic growth, which are
greatly influenced by what government does. Economists have always
appreciated the significance of government expenditures, taxes, and
debts, and more so since the great depression and Keynesian economics.
The relation of war to the economy has become increasingly significant
in an age of great wars and ever-increasing preparation for future wars.
These are only some of the impacts of government on the economy
and reasons why economics must concern itself with public affairs.
John Maurice Clark, nearly thirty years ago, said in The Social Control
of Busi-zess: "Control is an integral part of business, without which it
would not be business at all. The one implies the other, and the two
have grown together." Since then the interdependence of government and
business certainly has increased. For an understanding of the economy,
we must also understand government and appreciate the interrelation
between government and business.
Government, however, is not all-powerful, and in a free society is
certainly not the end objective of economic activity. In a democracy,
government is only the largest and most inclusive of many associations
of major importance. While it is the only organization which legally
may use force to secure compliance with its decrees, it must operate essentially
by consent. Ours is a volitional society in which the central
problem is that of getting individuals to put forth their best efforts with
a minimum of compulsion.
The end objective is individual and family welfare, much more than
national strength, although the former promotes the latter. In the
words of the late Msgr. John A. Ryan: "Industry exists for man, not
man for industry"; and so also does government. It is the citizens, the
human beings who constitute our society, who are central in our system
of free enterprise and both the economy and the government exist to
promote their welfare.
While our society is basically individualistic, it is also associational.
One of the most characteristic differences between totalitarian and
democratic governments lies in their respective attitudes toward voluntary
associations among their citizens. Every totalitarian government
ever known, whether of the right or the left, has either suppressed or
brought under its complete control all associations within its borders.