problems. Present-day theorists do express themselves on practical public
policy issues and advise the policy makers. Not only, however, are
many of them somewhat apologetic in doing so, but greatly prefer to
deal with universal truths which lend themselves to model building and
mathematical reasoning.
Back of this attitude is not merely the quest for universality, but an
overpowering desire to be scientific. In common with many other social
scientists, economists as a group long for the exactitude of the natural
sciences. The nearest approach to such precision seems to many to lie
in the reduction of economic problems to mathematical equations and
then in the application of the proven laws of mathematics to their
solution. Justice Holmes, the great dissenter, once said: "The future
belongs to the man of statistics and the master of economics."'3 But
Holmes could not anticipate the present vogue among economists for
mathematics, which has produced a situation in which many, perhaps a
majority, of the members of the Association, like myself, cannot even
read a large percentage of the articles published in the Review and other
economic journals. A difficult specialized language has the advantages of
appearing very learned and may afford some protection against witchhunters,
but it loses listeners and readers. I do not want to be understood
as suggesting that articles with a good deal of mathematics in
them should not be published in economic journals, but only that I would
like to see more articles that I can read. A fundamental difficulty with the
mathematical approach to economics is the frequent impossibility of
taking account in the equations of all factors, particularly changing factors.
Just as there is danger of superficiality in institutional economics,
so there is danger of unreality in mathematical economics. Econometrics
and mathematical oconomics have such value and hoped-for promise
that they merit the position they have attained, in most major universities,
of inclusion in the program of instruction for graduate students.
But they fall far short of giving economics the precision of the natural
sciences. Nor is there any other approach that offers greater hope for
ab!.olute precision.
While not decrying the econometricians or other economnists who are
trying to make economics an exact science, it seems to me very desirable
that other economists should continue to pursue other methods in their
attempts to gain a better understanding of the economy and in seeking
correct answers to the practical problems of economic life. Man is more
complex than material things and does not lend himself to the same sort
of experimentation as do guinea pigs. In general controlled experiments
are not possible in economics; accurate observation and reasoning from
observed facts is as far as we can go in the discovery of truth. It is comforting