failure to agree to this limitation on its purpose. What is supposed to
be the relation from a descriptive point of view, between the classical
competitive model and the actual pricing process as it manifests itself
so differently in myriads of individual transactions in many different
kinds of markets as well as in the absence of anything which could be
logically considered a "market"? To get some light on this question we
have tried to compare both our competitive and our imperfectly competitive
models with the actual process of pricing in American industry.
It has been contended that, however imperfectly competitive our
economy may be or however comprehensive governmental controls have
been, over a reasonable period of time substantially the same results are
produced as though the economy were in fact fully competitive. This
approximation of the results of competition may come about because
competitive forces begin to reassert themselves within the limits of the
new controls or barriers and/or because competitive forces manage to
evade the controls and circumvent the barriers. On the other hand, the
governmental controls and barriers are often instituted on the assumption
that competition has broken down and the controls and barriers are
intended to produce the same result which competition would have produced
had it been effective.

Schultz has pointed out in this connection that the results of governmental
intervention in American agriculture have apparently not been
so strikingly different from what they would have been had the competitive,
laissez-faire model been operating. This question of whether
or not American agriculture is still essentially competitive and laissez
faire is obviously importantly determinative in assessing the essential
character of our system. We have tried to grapple with the broad
aspects of this problem under the title "Is the Economy More Competitive
in the Long Run than in the Short Run?"

Basically connected with the question of whether the process of price
determination in our economy is still essentially competitive, is that of
whether or not the structure and functioning of the distributional
system has been fundamentally altered. Have the changes which have
taken place in the organization of industry, of labor, of agriculture and
in the participation of government in the economy affected the size of
distributional shares in the economy or the size of factor compensation?
Is the economic theory which would be adequate for the analysis of
distribution on the assumption of "atomistic" competition adequate for
a much more complex kind of economy?

We have tried to get at these interrelated and complex questions
from a number of different angles. The most general form of the question
is: To what extent can economic power be exercised through organization
to affect income distribution and factor compensation? What is