moved in the right direction, albeit often too late, but have erred by
moving too far. Too late and too much has been the general practice.
For example, in early 1966, it was the right policy for the Federal Reserve
to move in a less expansionary direction-though it should have
done so at least a year earlier. But when it moved, it went too far, producing
the sharpest change in the rate of monetary growth of the postwar
era. Again, having gone too far, it was the right policy for the Fed
to reverse course at the end of 1966. But again it went too far, not only
restoring but exceeding the earlier excessive rate of monetary growth.
And this episode is no exception. Time and again this has been the
course followed-as in 1919 and 1920, in 1937 and 1938, in 1953 and
1954, in 1959 and 1960.
The reason for the propensity to overreact seems clear: the failure of
monetary authorities to allow for the delay between their actions and
the subsequent effects on the economy. They tend to determine their
actions by today's conditions-but their actions will affect the economy
only six or nine or twelve or fifteen months later. Hence they feel impelled
to step on the brake, or the accelerator, as the case may be, too
hard.
My own prescription is still that the monetary authority go all the
way in avoiding such swings by adopting publicly the policy of achieving
a steady rate of growth in a specified monetary total. The precise
rate of growth, like the precise monetary total, is less important than
the adoption of some stated and known rate. I myself have argued for a
rate that would on the average achieve rough stability in the level of
prices of final products, which I have estimated would call for something
like a 3 to 5 per cent per year rate of growth in currency plus all
commercial bank deposits or a slightly lower rate of growth in currency
plus demand deposits only.6 But it would be better to have a fixed rate
that would on the average produce moderate inflation or moderate deflation,
provided it was steady, than to suffer the wide and erratic perturbations
we have experienced.
Short of the adoption of such a publicly stated policy of a steady
rate of monetary growth, it would constitute a major improvement if
the monetary authority followed the self-denying ordinance of avoiding
wide swings. It is a matter of record that periods of relative stability in
the rate of monetary growth have also been periods of relative stability
in economic activity, both in the United States and other countries.
Periods of wide swings in the rate of monetary growth have also been
periods of wide swings in economic activity.
a In an as yet unpublished article on "The Optimum Quantity of Money," I conclude
that a still lower rate of growth, something like 2 per cent for the broader definition,
might be better yet in order to eliminate or reduce the difference between private and
total costs of adding to real balances.