If the level of employment is unsatisfactory from the standpoint of
the community, who is to assume responsibility for seeing that policies
are modified or broadened so as to permit the largest amount of employment
compatible with the other interests of the community? To
some extent the government can assume this responsibility. The government
has three principal ways of affecting the general level of employment:
(1) the method of correction, (2) the method of compensation,
and (3) the method of stimulation.
The method of correction involves making changes in public policies
or forcing changes in private policies in order to increase employment
or, put in other words, altering the distribution of economic advantages
in order to increase the total amount of income.30 Many public policies
-tax policies, regulation of security markets, price-pegging schemeswere
adopted without an appraisal of their probable effect upon employment
and even without a suspicion that there was a problem of
maintaining employment. Recognition of the existence of such a problem
may lead the community to prefer to revise many of its policies.
The policy of correction would also involve the assertion of some public
control over private policies. There are various ways by which the government
might exercise such control, but on the whole the possibilities
are limited because, in many cases, control cannot be accomplished
without a large number of detailed regulations which would be impracticable
to administer.
The method of compensation involves an attempt by deficit financing
to offset the failure of private enterprise to provide a satisfactory
amount of employment; note that I do not say "full employment."
Strictly speaking, the method of compensation should not be used until
the community has gone as far as it is willing to go in applying the
policy of correction. Otherwise, the policy may divert the government
from thoroughly exploring the possibility of enforcing changes in private
policies that would raise the level of employment. In fact, the persistent
use of the policy of compensation may stimulate a development of
private policies that are unfavorable to employment. Why should an
up-and-coming labor movement, for example, permit the demand created
by public spending to produce more employment rather than
higher wages?
The use of deficits to compensate for a chronic shortage of investment
opportunities raises very different economic issues from those
involved in the use of deficits in periods of depression when there are
One might visualize as an ideal a central planning agency charged with the
responsibility of reviewing the obstacles limiting the amount of enterprise and of estimating
how much sacrifice by different groups would produce how much expansion in employment.
These reports might be referred to representative agencies to determine which interests to
sacrifice for the enlargement of income.