the postwar period than they did previously, so that any imbalance between
inventories and sales could be corrected sooner. Since consumer
outlays-and often also other expenditures-were well maintained during
the recent recessions of production, the rising phase of inventory
disinvestment ceased rather early and this naturally favored a fairly
prompt recovery of production.

Thus, numerous changes in the structure of our economy have combined
to stimulate over-all expansion during the postwar period and to
keep within moderate limits the cyclical declines that occurred in production.
Indeed, there are cogent grounds for believing that these declines
were even more moderate than our familiar statistical records
suggest. The line of division between production for sale and production
for direct use does not stand still in a dynamic economy. In the
early decades of the industrial revolution an increasing part of our production
was, in effect, transferred from the home to the shop and factory.
This trend has continued in the preparation of foods, but in other activities
it appears on balance to have been reversed. The great expansion
of home ownership, the invention of all sorts of mechanical contrivances
for the home, longer vacations, the general eagerness for improvement,
if not also the income tax, have stimulated many people to
do more and more things for themselves. Consumers have become
equipped to an increasing degree with the capital goods they need for
transportation, for the refrigeration of food, for the laundering of
clothes, as well as for entertainment and instruction. They have also
been doing, on an increasing scale, much of the carpentry, painting,
plumbing, and landscaping around their homes. Such activities of production
are less subject to the business cycle than the commercial activities
which enter statistical reports. Yet these domestic activities have
undoubtedly been expanding rapidly, and perhaps expanding even more
during the declining than during the rising phase of the business cycle.
Hence, it is entirely probable that the cyclical swings of production have
of late been smaller, while the average rate of growth of production has
been higher, than is commonly supposed.

V

It is in the nature of an economic vocabulary to change slowly, when
it changes at all. We keep speaking of the price system, the business
cycle, capitalism, socialism, communism, and sometimes we even refer
to the "inherent instability" of capitalism or of communism; but the
reality that these terms and phrases are intended to denote or sum up
does not remain fixed. I have tried to show how a conjuncture of structural
changes in our economy has served to modify the business cycle
of our times. Some of these changes were planned while others were