they grow larger; moreover, answers to small problems as well as to
large ones are needed.

Anyone who engages in research always faces the possibility of failure.
Even if no solutions are found, much may be gained. Study of problems
has its own reward in the inner satisfaction it affords and the broadening
influence it has. The natural scientists have come to regard the experiment
that fails, if accurately performed, as but little less valuable than
the one that succeeds. In Henry Van Dyke's delightful little essay
"Alpenrosen and Goat's Milk,"'4 the story is told of the Swiss village
festival in which the highpoint was the climbing of the greased pole.
Youth after youth attempted the feat only to fail. Finally, the hero got
to the top and received great plaudits. But as Van Dyke remarked,
much of the credit belonged to those who preceded him and rubbed the
grease off the pole.

IV

I believe that economics does have great possibilities and a promising
future. To begin with, we will have far more students. More students
will increase our problems, but also will be a great challenge and opportunity.
There are now a million fewer people of college age than prior tothe
second world war, but above a million more students in colleges and
universities. Enrollment figures are once more increasing and, if the
present percentages going to college are maintained, will increase more
than 50 per cent within less than fifteen years. There is every reason,
moreover, to expect that the very pronounced trend toward a large
percentage of young men and women actually going to college will
continue. There are forecasts that within a generation as large a percentage
of the people of college age will actually attend college as the
present percentage of boys and girls of high school age enrolled in
secondary schools. That percentage is now 88, compared with less
than 15 per cent at the beginning of the century. College enrollments
were less than 5 per cent in 1900; today, close to 30 per cent.
Many will view the expected increase in enrollments with alarm. It
will prove more difficult to staff economics departments adequately
with qualified teachers. There is even now a shortage of qualified faculty
in some schools of business administration and in the economics departments
of some small colleges. The number of graduate students in economics,
excluding students from abroad, moreover, has been decreasing
rather than increasing. More graduate students, including some who
earn Ph.D. degrees, go into business. There is also some attrition in
economics faculties by reason of the higher salaries in other comparable
occupations. Whether the prospects of an increasing demand and a