one helpful step. Other ways of strengthening the profession's grip on
reality need to be developed. Most of the members of this Association
are not only economic thinkers but teachers as well. Promotion of better
understanding of economic problems by future men of affairs and statesmen
is not the least of the economists' obligations. But the economics
they teach must reflect understanding of the forces that shape the changing
economic world.
Economists, therefore, are under double obligation-for themselves
and for their disciples-to perfect their implements and processes of
thinking. They must beware of dogmas; avoid blind faith in free enterprise,
in the all-curing beneficence of the entrepreneur's profit dollar
without reference to the source whence it is drawn or the use to which it
is put; as well as refrain from sole reliance on the hydraulic strength of
the income stream, or the salutory nature of the dollar spent by the consumer,
regardless of who he may be or the rationality or wastefulness of
his expenditure. They must subject to searching analysis the effects of
outlays by the state, the investor, the producer, and the consumer. They
must be conscious of the importance of all four phases of national income:
its source, its magnitude, its distribution, and its use. Likewise
they must not fall into the error of depending on the quantity of money
alone as an adequate regulator of economic developments, or adopt the
reverse doctrine that the amount of money is an unimportant and irrelevant
condition with little or no bearing on prices or the course of events.
No set of statistical series, to say nothing of any single series, is a
sufficient basis for determining causal relationships on which economic
policy can be predicated with safety. They are only indications of where
one should look for the causes and interrelationships that determine economic
events. When it is said that statistics are the economist's conscience,
what is meant is that they indicate the limits of the territory
in which the economist may tread with assurance on the hard surface
of fact. They do not restrict his freedom of exploration in the less easily
traveled lanes of intelligent surmise and imaginative understanding. A
good economist need not be a seer but he must not wear blinders; and
he must have the seeing eye.
In order to perform their function adequately, economists must adhere
rigidly to the discipline of thorough analysis of conditions as they
are and not permit themselves to be blinded by preconceived theories or
by transitory considerations of expediency. Lasting economic health
would not be achieved by sole dependence on the encouragement or
limitation of savings or on the promotion of adequate investment or
consumption; or on the expansion and contraction of the supply of
money. Great leaders who, under the stress of current conditions, have
evolved systems of economic concepts modify, expand, or alter these