prejudices, coin good will, and create habits of thought without the
public's being aware that its ideas are being fabricated for it. Witness
the recent wave of corporate institutional advertising designed to sell
not products but the corporate executives' conception of the American
way of life and the corporation's place in it. The United States
Steel Corporation brings to vast television audiences not merely
entertainment of high cultural value but a picture of itself and its numerous
corporate subsidiaries as "the industrial family that serves the
nation." And institutional advertising does not neglect the appeal to
idealism. The American Petroleum Institute describes in eloquent language
the role that the American oil industry is playing in "man's quest
for freedom." As an "energizer of men's thoughts and a contributor to
freedom" [5, p. 21], we are assured, it will continue to play an increasingly
important role. General Electric, boasting that progress is its most
important product, generously identifies its achievements with those of
the electrical industry of which it is a part and with the growth and
progress of a greater America, which it is privileged to serve [6,
pp. 6-7].
In conducting this educational campaign, spokesmen for the corporations
have used the customary mass-communication media but have not
relied on them alone. They have resorted to subtler and more personal
means for disseminating ideas: plant tours, special programs for clergymen,
and summer conferences and seminars for college professors. To
the latter they have invited scores of social scientists, some of whom
they have regarded as holding a warped idea of the place of big business
in the American economy, and they have entertained them with a
lavish generosity to which few have been accustomed. In the language
of the poet, some who came to scoff remained to pray.
In recent years the corporation's educational interests have broadened,
and it has assumed increasing responsibility for the financial
welfare of the American system of private higher education. To meet
the plight of American colleges and to forestall federal assistance, with
its threat to freedom of inquiry, the corporation is stepping into the
breach created by higher costs and a decline in individual giving. The
courts have upheld the legal right of a corporation to bestow on educational
institutions its stockholders' money without their consent, and
Congress has authorized the deduction of gifts of this nature from taxable
income. In 1955 corporate giving to American colleges is estimated
to have totaled $100,000,000, approximating from 7 to 8 cents out of
every dollar spent by private schools [20, p. 12]. More important, three
top-flight corporate executives were instrumental in the formation of
the Council for Financial Aid to Education, for whose direction a distinguished
scholar and former college president was selected. With gift-