17 to 38 times their standard errors and the j's from 12 to 18 times as
great as their standard errors.

On the whole, we should not be surprised by the fact that we obtain
higher values for k and lower values for j in our first three time series
studies than we do for the cross-section studies. For as we have pointed
out, the two functions are, in fact, somewhat different and we should
not necessarily expect identical results. Moreover, in the time studies,
there tends to be a systematic downward bias to the index of production
which keeps it closer to the index of labor than it should be in
reality and hence gives an excessive value to k. This downward bias is
caused by two factors: (1) Since the indexes are primarily based on
the quantities of raw material produced, they do not include the increased
fabrication and reworking of these materials which is a pronounced,
although not a universal, tendency of industry. (2) It is in
practice not possible to include with sufficient rapidity the new
products which are continually pushing themselves forward, nor to drop
in adequate time the products which are becoming obsolete. The net
result is to keep the index numbers of Product (P), particularly during
the latter years of a given period, closer to Labor (L) than in reality
they should be and hence k is raised above and j is depressed below
their "true" values.

This weakness is absent from the cross-section or inter-industry
studies, which are made for a given year, and we would, therefore,
expect the k's to be lower and the j's to be higher in this group of
studies. Such is, in fact, exactly the case.

It may be of some significance that when the factor of time is
eliminated from each of the three basic series of Labor, Capital, and
Product, and the deviations from the trends are studied (as in Series
IV), that the true value of k for the period of 1899-1922 is reduced to
.63. This is identical with the average value of k for the six years for
which inter-industry studies were made.

It may also be of some significance that in three of the four time