mitted to political constituencies that fail egregiously to correspond to
the economic areas which will be affected by the course of action
nominally endorsed by the vote. And when results are economically bad,
they can be decorously buried under a deficit appropriation or camouflaged
under a new political program of government action, or criticism
may be diverted by the red herring of irrelevant forensics. I am quite
aware that some of these same shortcomings carry over into private
business affairs whenever large numbers of people must work together
in a single organization. Instead of party politics we get labor union
politics, intra-corporation politics, and farm organization politics. But
these are not functional characteristics of business, inseparable from
it as they are from political organization. Whereas the basic technique
of the political state is politics, the basic technique of business is productive
efficiency.
IV
The preceding consideration of some of the shortcomings of government
in business has suggested various superiorities to be found in a
system of self-controlled business. But this carries no implication that
private enterprise as we have known it has displayed these merits in
adequate measure, or that the systematic development of collective bargaining
procedures would of itself introduce satisfactory conditions.
Such a road to better things would be found long and hard. If collective
bargaining between or among functional interest groups is to realize
its potentialities as the mechanism best suited to advance the distinctive
ends of economic life, four conditions must be met. There must be (1)
functional equality among the parties; (2) democratic representation
of individuals in local groups and of local units in overhead organizations;
(3) full disclosure of facts and (4) sincere use of professional
assistance.
True collective bargaining must start from the premise that both
parties are mutually indispensable or functionally equal. A bargain
connotes an actual, however regretful, meeting of the minds of the
parties. It means that they have come to a common recognition as to
what is the most workable adjustment of a mutual relationship. Such
a solution is not arrived at if one party is adamant that labor is the
only truly productive factor, that the farmer's interest is paramount, or
that business belongs unequivocally and indivisibly to management or
to ownership (an ambiguity even here). Over against the sterile claim
that labor has no right to participate in management stands the patent
fact that labor already does participate in management. The denial
of the opportunity to settle basic questions by bargaining caused labor's
participation to take the form of destructive strikes, slow-downs, or