the discoverer of hidden costs; or Winston Churchill's observation that
"a hopeful disposition is not the sole qualification to be a prophet"; or
Walter Bagehot's reflection that "it is a question whether the benevolence
of mankind does most good or harm" (Physics and Politics, Ch.
5).

First of the earlier views to be reversed was that imbedded in the
population forecasts (or projections as they now are more cautiously
labeled) of the 1930's. Already in 1895 Edwin Cannan forecast a virtual
cessation of population growth in England and Wales by 1950. In
the late 1920's and 1930's it was inferred that the populations of most
Western countries would soon become stationary, the American at a
level below 200 million. Even eventual decline was anticipated. Net
reproduction rates were near unity, and sometimes still falling. Economists
began exploring economic life in hypothetically stationary or declining
populations. Publicists and reformers, some of whom may have
recognized an opportunity to clothe welfare-state philosophy in demographic
terms, refurbished old arguments for a family wage as well as
diverse subsidies to parents, with the result that family allowance systems
won widespread approval. Inadequately explored in a still-Kiplingesque
West, however, were implications of the fact that while the
rate of population growth in a politically fissured Western world was
falling, that of underdeveloped lands, containing about two-thirds of
the world's people, was incipiently high and potentially rising.
By the late 1940's, however, changes in both fertility and population
prospects were evident. Not only was death control augmenting natural
increase in the underdeveloped world, natality and natural increase
had risen in the developed world, in part as a response to rising employment
and the emergence of the welfare state. Although fertility
later moved somewhat below its postwar peak, population projections
were revised upward, sometimes by a factor of 2 or more. Thus the
population anticipated for the United States in 2000 was set above 300
million instead of below 200 million [10]. Still, should age-specific fertility
move downward, as it now seems to be doing, postulated growth
rates will be reduced. Real cohort analysis, designed in the 1940's to
replace use of synthetic cross-sectional cohorts, should presently
confirm whether current fertility declines reflect a decline in desired
family size and signal the advent of a growth rate of only about 1 per
cent. In the 1930-70 interval, of course, population will have increased
more than anticipated in the 1930's, about 283 million, or 42 per cent, in
the developed world, and 1,271 million, or 91 per cent, in the underdeveloped
world.

A second reversal of interpretation relates to population growth and
capital formation. G. Cassel [7, pp. 134-35, 1491 had implied that a 1