to have become emeritus from the category of enfant terrible;
and the only thing more terrible than the sight of an immature youth
is the sight of a half-baked elder statesman. So, that part of methodology
which consists of passing on good advice concerning the scholarly
pitfalls to avoid and the proper paths to climb, I had better avoid.
But there is another possibility: I could give a sermon tonight on
the use and misuse of mathematics in economics. This subject is the
only commodity in the world that seems not subject to Gossen's law
of diminishing marginal utility. It was only yesterday that three successive
presidential addresses touched upon this delicious topic; and
the strongest of those attacks on mathematics led to so resonant a response
with this annual audience as to give rise to a standing ovation
for the speaker.

Thomas Hardy remarked, "If the Archbishop of Canterbury says
that God exists, that is all in the day's business; but if he says God
does not exist, there you have something really significant." What a
Daniel-come-to-Judgment I would be, if I, the lamb that strayed
fustus' and mustus' from the fold, were to testify before God and this
company that mathematics had all been a horrible mistake; that right
along, it has all been there in Marshall, Books III and V; and that the
most one needs for life as an economist is a strong voice, and a compass
and ruler.

I wish I could be obliging. Yet even if my lips could be brought to
utter the comforting words, like Galileo I would hear myself whispering
inside, "But mathematics does indeed help."

I am left then finally with one choice. This evening I shall talk less
about technical economics than about economists. Where do we members
"of the most agreeable of the moral sciences" fit in the great stream
of ideas and ideologies? On this solemn occasion I shall eschew gossip,
leaving that to the corridors and lobbies. But I shall unavoidably have
to deal with personalities and names if I am to explore the interrelations
between professional economic thought and the general history
of ideas.

I. Within the Looking Glass

As my old teacher Schumpeter used to say, "We are all girls here
together." Hence, mine can be the view of an insider looking in, and
an insider looking out.

I begin with two books. One is a work of scholarship; the other is,
and you will excuse the distinction, merely a textbook. Compare The
History of Economic Analysis by Joseph Schumpeter with The History
of Economic Doctrines of Gide and Rist, which students used to study
in my day when preparing for general examinations. I dare say that