And the merger movement of the 1950's has steadily progressed in
the face of the Celler-Kefauver amendment to Section 7 of the Clayton
Act, which was designed to stop it.
That the combination movement has proceeded apace while an
articulate minority has tried to stem it reflects, I believe, the wholehearted
acceptance of the modern corporation by contemporary society.
In manufacturing, mining, wholesaling, indeed in the whole range of
economic activities loosely designated by the term industry, corporate
enterprise has replaced the individual entrepreneur as a characteristic
business institution.4
The several combination movements have resulted from complex
causes, but they have all represented in greater or less degree a quest
by business for security. Business firms have sought through mergers
to isolate themselves from the vagaries of the market. The industrial
combination movement has been paralleled by the growth of powerful
labor unions that, whatever their incidental benefit to individual workers,
have had as their primary goal the sale of labor under noncompetitive
conditions.
The use of the organization as an instrument for carrying on activity
has not been confined to business and labor. To an impressive extent it
has supplanted the individual in the educational and cultural areas
of American life: science, creative scholarship, sports, philanthropy,
religion, civil liberties, and the like.
The growth of knowledge is essentially a social process in which
each generation starts with the accumulated wisdom of previous ages.
Although a single generation's contribution may bulk large in comparison
with that of any previous generation, at any one time it represents
but a small part of society's total knowledge. While the accumulation
of knowledge is a social process, traditionally it has been kept going
by the discoveries of skeptical and inquiring individuals. The United
States patent policy was based on this idea. To promote the progress
of science and useful arts the Constitution provides that an inventor
may have an exclusive right to his discoveries for a limited time under
terms laid down by Congress. The Constitution, as a political instrument
reflecting the influence of eighteenth-century individualism, contemplates
that the rewards of technological improvement shall go to
the individual inventor. It makes no provision for teamwork or group
'In emphasizing the role of the modern corporation as an organizational force in
American industry and the extent to which it has supplanted the individual entrepreneur,
I am not unmindful that the corporation has frequently been the means by which
ambitious individuals have enhanced their power and influence, or of the fact that in
eighteenth-century England the individual entrepreneur "organized" economic activity
in the process of production. The change in the status of the individual in economic
activity might be regarded as one of degree, but it is so great as to constitute a major
change in institutional arrangements.