of empirical demonstration on the economic competence of the state
has been the telling anecdote.
Third, the economist's influence upon the formulation of economic
policy has usually been small. It has been small because he lacked special
professional knowledge of the comparative competence of the state
and of private enterprise. The economist could and did use his economic
theory, and it cannot be denied that the economist's economic
theory is better than everyone's else economic theory. But for reasons
to which I shall immediately turn, economic theory has not been an
adequate platform. Lacking real expertise, and lacking also evangelical
ardor, the economist has had little influence upon the evolution of
economic policy.
III
If economists have lacked a firm empirical basis for their policy
views, one miglht expect that guidance could be derived from their
theoretical systems. In fact, to the degree that a theoretical system has
been submitted to a variety of empirical tests, it is a source of more
reliable knowledge than an empirical uniformity in solitary confinement.
The theory allows tests of the relationship incorporated in the
theory that are outside the view of the discoverer of the theory, so these
tests are more challenging.
The economists' policy views have in fact been much influenced by
their theories. The vast preference for free international trade is surely
based in good part upon the acceptance of the classical theory of comparative
costs. The general presumption against direct regulation of
prices by the state is surely attributable in good part to the belief in
the optinmum properties of a competitive price system. The growth of
support among economists for public regulation of economic activities
is at least partly due to the development of the theory of disharmonies
between private and social costs, and partly also to the increasingly
more rigorous standards of optimum economic performance.
If it would be wrong to deny a substantial influence of economic
theory on economists' policy views, it would be wronger still to suggest
that the policies follow closely and unambiguously from the general
theory. Our first example of free trade will suffice to illustrate the
looseness of the connection. Smith supported free trade because he believed
that tariffs simply diverted resources from mnore productive to
less productive fields, and the absence of an explanation for the rates
of exchange between foreign and domestic commodities did not bother
him. A century later Sidgwick argued that on theoretical grounds
tariffs were often beneficial to a nation, but that "from the difficulty
of securing in any actual government sufficient wisdom, strength, and
singleness of aim to introduce protection only so far as it is advantageous