increments.3 Von Thilnen went on to state that the rates of wages and
of interest were equal to the amounts of the product added by the last
increments of each. He was thus the real discoverer of marginal productivity.
Nor was this all. He reasoned that the product added by each
equal increment of a factor was a constant fraction of the preceding
increment of product, namely two-thirds, in the case of labor and ninetenths,
in the case of capital. This meant that it would be necessary to
increase a factor in a given geometric ratio in order to increase the
product by equal arithmetic amounts. This is precisely the law of the
soil which Mitscherlich and W. J. Spillman later discovered,4 and it
is strikingly similar to the so-called Weber-Fechner law of physiological
response. It would be most interesting to find out whether these conclusions
of Von Thunen were merely happy hypotheses or whether,
like so much of his work, they were based upon experimentation.
Von Thunen's work, unfortunately, never had the influence which it
deserved. The British, with their customary insularity of thought,
virtually ignored it. The Germans, dominated by the fact-grubbing
historical school, while lavishing attention upon Von Thiunen's theory
of location and his advocacy of </ap as a just wage, almost completely
neglected his discovery of the curve of the diminishing increment
as the guiding principle for both production and distribution.
Indeed, schooled as they were to believe in the relativity of economic
principles, they naturally averted their gaze from what gave every
evidence of being an economic law, which was independent of time
and place.
It is to the glory of American economics that it was,-one of our
own number, John Bates Clark, who at a meeting of our Association
in 1888, fifty-nine years ago tonight, announced what was in effect
the rediscovery of the marginal productivity principle. Clark, who
had studied in Germany, had possibly been unconsciously influenced
by Von Thunen, but certainly he was not consciously following him
when he stated:5
An increasing amount of labor applied to a fixed amount of pure capital goods
yields a smaller and smaller rate of return. . . . Let there be ten thousnd
dollars worth of productive instruments and ten men to use them. Let each
man be supposed to create by the operation a product worth three dollars