right of the individual to shape his own destiny," was a product of his
age. It reflected a mode of thinking that was manifest in politics, in
religion, in the arts, in science, in commerce and industry-a spirit that
had permeated the whole fabric of eighteenth-century English society.2
It has been said that no economist has encompassed his age so thoroughly
as did Adam Smith. It is perhaps equally true that no economist
was so encompassed by his age as was Adam Smith.
Nothing pleases the educated mind so much as the systematic,
philosophical expression of ideas with which it is familiar and which
it deems good, by one whose eloquence, erudition, and profundity it can
scarcely hope to achieve. The Wealth of Nations had a following waiting
to be led. Before Smith's death it had run through five editions; by
the end of the eighteenth century it had been translated into five foreign
languages and had been pirated in Ireland. It was discussed in
drawing rooms and quoted by parliamentarians. Many of the restrictions
against which it complained were embodied in laws and regulations
that had largely become dead letters; nevertheless, it was not
until well into the nineteenth century that Parliament wiped off the
statute books the last of the mercantilistic measures and officially embraced
free trade in international commerce. In doing so it responded
not so much to what anybody had written as to what nearly everybody
who counted thought. The success of the free-trade movement was a
belated recognition of the fact that England's industry and manufacturing
were the world's best and that the interests of English businessmen
demanded free access to markets and raw materials.
II. The Organizational Revolution
But economic individualism, the philosophical product of individualistic
capitalism, had no sooner conquered men's minds than the
great transformnation was ushering in the next sequence in the inexorable
flow of institutions and ideas. Corporate capitalism was soon to replace
individual capitalism as the characteristic institution of a mechanized
factory system, geared to mass-production methods and utilizing
the sciences of chemistry and physics for utilitarian ends. The business
corporation was soon to become the epicenter of an organizational
revolution of earthquake proportions. Just as the individual and individualism
dominated eighteenth-century society, so the organization
has come to dominate twentieth-century society. In nearly all areas
of twentieth-century social and intellectual life-business, sports, religion,