customers, bankers, government agencies [13, p. 340] [12, p. 270]
[28, pp. 195-205].
I shall not prolong this catalogue even if it is far from complete. Let
us admit that each of the possible deviations from maximum profit
may be "real" in some circumstances. But how effective and significant
are they? If the industry is effectively competitive-and it does not
have to be "purely" competitive or "perfectly" competitive-is there
much of a chance that the direction in which firms react, through their
decisions regarding prices, inputs and output, to a change in conditions
would be turned around by any of the "forces" listed? Before we say
apodictically no, we should examine a few of the reservations.
Security and Managerial Coordination
Let us single out two items which have been given especially wide
play: the "objective of security" and the question of "managerial coordination.
"
The demand for the recognition of a separate "security motive"
conflicting with the profit motive deserves a good discussion. But when
I prepared for it, I reread what I had written on this subject and found
that I could not improve on it. Will you do me the favor of reading it
[23, pp. 51-53 and 424-28] and, if you like it, make your students
read it?
That there are no business profits without risks and that there is not
much point in treating the two quite separately; that it would be silly
to call a decision one of profit-maximizing if it increased risk and uncertainty
so much as to reduce the chance of survival; that the notion
of long-run profits comprises all considerations of risks of loss; that, in
terms of my automobile-driving analogies, only a fool would assume
that maximization of speed means driving 120 miles an hour regardless
of curves and bumps; these are some of the things that have to be said
in this connection. But the most essential point to be made is that in
the economics of adjustment to change the issues of security, survival,
and maximum profit are merged. How primitive again to confuse new
ventures and daring moves with mere responses to stimuli, obvious
reactions to change. If a change in conditions calls for a certain reaction
in the name of maximum profits, the very same reaction is called
for also in the name of security of survival.
The other matter is of a more "behavioral" nature: the coordination
of different goals and judgments on the part of different members of
the management and the deviations from profit maximization that may
be involved in the process. Frankly, I cannot quite see what great
difference organizational matters are supposed to make in the firm's
price reactions to changes in conditions. Assume, for example, the import
duties on foreign products competing with the products of domestic