ELLIS: THE ECONOMIC WAY OF THINKING 9 
"social security" measures; but these measures should supplement and 
not supplant individual self-reliance. Amongst the several major vari- 
ables which combine to produce downturns in economic activity or to 
protract depression, we can surely select more promising channels of 
public policy than influencing saving. In the first place, even the pro- 
ponents of the over-saving thesis regard the growth of capital equip- 
ment as an earmark of economic progress; and hence consistency would 
demand primary emphasis upon inducing private investment sufficient 
to absorb savings, or supplementing this with public investment if need 
be-but in no event limiting saving. Secondly, saving rests upon in- 
grained habit or long-standing business mores and cannot readily be 
adjusted to short-term variations. But thirdly, when alternatives exist 
which do not abridge individual choice, and when their effectiveness is 
not less, they are clearly preferable. 
Monetary and fiscal policies to stablize economic activity are actually 
more effective because they operate quickly; and they do not abridge 
individual choice in the direct and objectionable fashion of policies to 
limit saving. Monetary policy consists directly of influencing the quan- 
tity of money and hence indirectly the rate of spending. Fiscal policy 
consists directly of influencing the rate of spending through the power- 
ful government sector, and indirectly the quantity of money. Individual 
economic choice does not, except in a minor way and need not at all, in- 
fluence the quantity of money; and individual economic choice does not 
determine government revenue and expenditure. Hence, in policies to 
achieve economic stability through Federal Reserve and Treasury opera- 
tions, we are not significantly abridging the choices which the eco- 
nomic agents-individuals, businesses, state and local governments- 
regard as matters for their own disposition. Economic activity under 
private enterprise in a progressive economy is not self-stabilizing and it 
requires political decisions to bring about an even evolution. But 
amongst eligible alternatives there is no apology for making the politi- 
cal decision gratuitously abridge individual free choice. The "optimum 
propensity to save" does precisely this. 
The fourth optimum to be considered is the notion of an "optimum 
rate of (foreign) exchange," first promulgated, so far as I know, by Mrs. 
Robinson.6 The idea is advanced rather incidentally and I do not pro- 
pose to give it more than illustrative significance. Furthermore, this rate, 
defined as the one which-wage rates and other underlying factors being 
given-causes the favorable balance of trade to be a maximum, is ex- 
plicitly said "by no means necessarily [to be] the most desirable rate 
from every point of view." Thus it may involve lower real income per 
'Joan Robinson, Essays in the Theory of Employment, 1st ed. (New York and London, 1937), pp. 198-201; 2nd ed. (Oxford, 1947), pp. 146-49. 
This content downloaded from 73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 