elected by a voting majority-one of its dangers. The laws of a liberal
state will also be general, non-specific, but in a sense quite different
from the Golden Rule or Law of Universal Love. The familiar figure is
rules of the road, in contrast with instructions where and when and
how to travel, whether arbitrary or conformable to a traditional practice.
But such freedom must be sweepingly limited by measures not
only of a "police" character in a broad sense, but also designed to
equip the individual and family for social life by implanting wants and
tastes in general conformity with the culture, and endowing with a
minimum of productive capacity (or ultimately with final goods) without
which freedom is a form empty of content. To take these units as
"given" is flagrantly contrary to essential facts-of-life, and means
ignoring the major social problem. It is along this line that 18th-19th
century liberalism went to an extreme that has provoked a reaction
which threatens to engulf all freedom, and justice too, in the modern
conception of it, if not to destroy civilization. Liberal states have been
engaged, however, through their short life, in correcting this imbalance
between freedom and justice; and more intelligence, better judgment,
is our need, rather than any radical departure in method.
The prime requisite is simply critical intelligence. And it may well
appear as if the race at large hates this type of effort, naturally, instinctively.
Anyhow, we have been conditioned in the opposite direction
virtually throughout history, with the first breaking away from
the ideals of conformity and submission to sacred law and authority
during the past few centuries. The real heart of modern liberalism is a
radical change: a virtual inversion in the conception of truth and believing,
a transfer from a moral-religious to an intellectual-moral basis.
What the world really needs to learn from science, for handling social
problems, is not its techniques but its moral code. In the religious age,
truth was absolute and belief a matter of right and wrong, hence,
naturally to be controlled by reward and punishment. For liberalism,
truth is always provisional, and rests on the "best" evidence--incidentally,
not logical demonstration, but that is a long story. Right
belief was a virtue, finally the condition of eternal salvation. The
principle was stated, particularly with reference to our own religious
tradition, by Lord Bacon: "the more absurd and incredible any divine
mystery is, the greater honor we do to God in believing it" (and in
similar terms by Tertullian, around 200 A.D.). Liberal moral values
fit the same description as the liberal conception of truth; not virtue
versus vice, but the best possible at any time and place. This means that
the object of devotion and pursuit is not ends but ideals, progressively
redefined as they are progressively realized, and always with the mode