the security market's ability to stand pretty much on its own feet in
December 1951-with a minimum of support through open-market
operations-and to stage a revival of rediscounting up to nearly a bil-
lion dollars, for the first time in eighteen years, and with no visible
signs of panic. These seem long steps toward a revival of a flexible in-
terest-rate policy, without which no general monetary control seems
to me possible.
One source of confusion still in our thinking is the distinction be-
tween the flexibility of interest rates and the level of rates. Many a
red herring has been drawn across this trail. When the emphasis was
greatest on fiscal policy and deficit financing in the late 'thirties, some
economists emphasized most the level of rates, and this emphasis has
persisted. One can trace it all the way from Keynes' "euthanasia of
the rentier" to some of the recent statements by the Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers. Keynes changed his mind, and almost the last time I
saw him was complaining that the easy money policy had been greatly
overdone and interest rates were too low both in England and here.
When I suggested that this was being done in his name, and that he
ought to write another book, he was much amused, and said he did
think he ought to keep one jump ahead."6 What most interests me is not
the level of rates-the present level may well be the long-run average
-but the flexibility of rates. I cannot sympathize with the view that we
had better not alter rates because any upward shift might be perma-
nent, and that to avoid such a shift we should fight inflation entirely
by other means."1
Despite, however, some recent steps in the right direction, the prob-
lem of coordinating debt management and monetary control still re-
mains a dilemma. We shall be at best for some time in the pioneering
stage, working under conditions for which earlier monetary theory and
policy provide little guidance. To pose the problem as merely one of
defining spheres of jurisdiction (though that is not unimportant) is to