tion pressure to cope wvith emerging shortages in his micro-environment,
may be worsenin(, his mnacro-environment and constraining the
adaptive potentialities which have gotten him where he is.
Optimum theory has been elaborated and clarified in recent decades.
Vhile account has been taken of the content of the welfare index being
maximized, it has been noted that output per man-hour may constitute
a quite satisfactory index, insofar as deviations from any other index
can be resolved through exchange supplemented by taxes. It has been
observed also that, while population size may condition a society's capacity
for reducing income inequality, it is size of economy much more
than size of population which facilitates economies of scale, competitiveness,
flexibility, etc. The circumstances governing the response of
welfare indicators to variation in population size have been found to
include extent of economies of scale, interindustry fit, external economic
relations, tastes, technology, length of time horizon, burden of
defense or tribute and foreign aid, and so on. Deviation of actual population
size from optimum size does not tend to induce a decline in fertility
unless this deviation reduces the rate of growth of income below
the expected level; this rarely happens in the neighborhood of the optimium,
and is not very likely when other income-increasing forces are
ascendant. It is possible, of course, that as man's time horizon is extended
thbrough prolonlgation of life and institutionalization of expectations,
sensitivity to possible deceleration of income growth increases.
Little attention has been given to the stability conditions surrounding
an optimum; yet failure to act in conformity with these undermines
some of the conditions defining this optimum.
Today emphla-sis is placed less on the optimum as such than on the
broader question: Is additional population growth advantageous? Will
it elevate or reduce the rate of growth of per capita income with which
other indicators of welfare are highly correlated? Will it contract or
extend the range of choice? After all, in much of the world average
population density exceeds the optimum level; moreover, many states
are too small to accommodate a modern economy, even given a great
deal of external exchange. In those countries, moreover, where a larger
population would be advantageous, it is highly desirable that increments
be added slowly, since a high growth rate sacrifices population
quality and equipment to sheer quantity (e.g., in Latin America and
Africa). Major issues tend to be examined when inquiry is directed toward
assessment of the effects of further growth. Such inquiry led Richard
Stone to ascertain how population growth retarded a society's approach
to F. P. Ramsey's state of Bliss. It directs attention to the adverse
input-absorbing externalities generated by population growth in
general and through increasing megalopolitan concentration-usually