profits slumped. In the end, the aggregate of personal incomes,
after taxes, declined less than 1 per cent and the decline was
over before the recession ended.
Although the details have varied from one case to the next, a marked
divergence between the movements of personal income and production
has occurred in each of the postwar recessions. Indeed, during 1953-54
the total income at the disposal of individuals defied the recession by
continuing to increase. This unique achievement was due to the tax
reduction that became effective soon after the onset of recession as well
as to the structural changes that have reduced the dependence of personal
income on the short-run movements of production.
II
When we turn from personal income to employment, we find that the
imprint of the business cycle is still strong. During each recession since
1948, unemployment reached a level which, while decidedly low in comparison
with the experience of the 'thirties, was sufficient to cause serious
concern. But although the fluctuations of employment have continued
to synchronize closely with the movements of production, the
relation between the two has been changing in ways which favor greater
stability of employment in the future.
As the industrialization of our economy proceeded during the nineteenth
century, an increasing part of the population became exposed to
the hazards of the business cycle. Manufacturing, mining, construction,
freight transportation-these are the strategic industries of a developing
economy and they are also the industries in which both production
and jobs have been notoriously unstable. Shortly after the Civil War,
the employees attached to this cyclical group of industries already constituted
23 per cent of the labor force. Employees of industries that have
remained relatively free from cyclical unemployment-that is, agriculture,
merchandising, public utilities, financial enterprises, the personal
service trades, and the government-accounted for another 32 per cent.
The self-employed in farming, business, and the professions, whose jobs
are especially steady, made up the rest or 45 per cent of the work force.
This was the situation in 1869. Fifty years later, the proportion of
workers engaged in farming, whether as operators or hired hands, had
shrunk drastically, and this shrinkage was offset only in part by the
relative gain of other stable sources of employment. Consequently, the
proportion of employees in the cyclical industries kept rising, decade
after decade, and reached 36 per cent in 1919.
Clearly, the broad effect of economic evolution until about 1920 was
to increase the concentration of jobs in the cyclically volatile industries,
and this was a major force tending to intensify declines of employment