ments of American civilization. However this may be, it seems probable
that the size, geographical dispersion, and racial heterogeneity of
population have some part to play in explaining the relative distance
between government and business in the United States.
Much more important, in my opinion, is the fact that the really
revolutionary changes in the role of government and in the relation of
various groups to government produced by the great depression and
the war have not yet been fully accepted in this country. Where counterrevolution
is still considered to be a possibility no one is quite
prepared to lay down his arms. This, of course, puts the matter too
strongly, but there continues to be a conflict between what in factand
quite demonstrably-has happened and the views that are held in
various quarters concerning the possibilities of action in the light of
these facts. Characterizing the situation in the broadest possible terms
I am inclined to emphasize the following developments: Government
expenditures as a percentage of gross national product have, of course,
increased enormously since the 1920's. If one lumps federal, state, and
local expenditures together they are currently running at twice the
volume of gross private capital formation in the United States. It is
obvious, therefore, that variations in these expenditures and in the
relation between tax revenues and expenditures can have an effect on
aggregate demand, output, and employment that was out of the question
in the 1920's. At the same time the role of government in the
process of economic decision-making, its "weight," if I may use the
term, has in many ways not increased commensurately with its share
in total outlays.
Although the relative growth of the public sector has necessarily
meant a relative decline in the position of the private sector there has
been no significant change in the predominant role assigned to business
in the process of capital formation and the direction of investment.
Even at the depth of the depression in the United States when
business leadership was in nearly total eclipse the voices raised in
favor of expansion of government ownership or a larger role in the
direction of resource use were feeble and ineffective. The Tennessee
Valley Authority was about the only "socialistic" action that can be
attributed to the New Deal. The lasting changes of the 1930's were
mainly in the fields of social welfare, labor-management relations, and
the regulation of capital markets. The great increases in government
expenditures came, of course, during and after the war. An observer
of the current scene can hardly fail to be impressed by the absence
of doctrinal dispute on the proper role of business. Government ownership
is a dead issue if, indeed, it ever was a live one. Government
regulation of public utilities on which much hope was placed at the