situations cannot be averaged into a rule of wide application; neither
can they be conventionalized for permanent handling. The very
changefulness of our economic weather makes it necessary to provide
for the voices of local operative groups to be heard in the making of
directive decisions. These decisions (all of which are the stuff of which
values are made) cannot be arrived at by manipulation of data from
the morgue of a statistical bureau. Their content must be supplied
currently from the events of the moment and the anticipation of the
future-so far as the operating bodies conceive themselves to be concerned
with the future. The important point is that the evaluations be
real because they are written in by the actual parties at interest in the
actual situations in which alternatives are presented.
This brings us to the second basic deficiency of government as a
directive agent in the economic sphere. Even if it could actually discover
and formulate the common material interest of the whole people,
it is by its very nature inept as an agency for attaining that general
interest. It lacks the necessary intimacy and flexibility to apply generalized
formulas to the particularized situations which make the real body
of business life. Evaluations to be sound must not only be first-hand
but must also be kept constantly up to date. A law or administrative
rule freezes old valuations, whereas the business process must be kept
experimental and subject to pragmatic tests. Any politician or government
administrator is constitutionally set against admitting mistakes.
The Agricultural Adjustment Administration affords an excellent
case in point. It was a thoughtful and sincere effort on the part of its
framers to set up a scheme of economic democracy through which
local and even individual interests should come to expression within
the setting of the national problem. But however carefully annual programs,
"goals," and other operating devices may be conceived in the
interest of true economic adjustment, they have to be implemented and
defended, extended or altered by Congressmen. And the latter work in
a political, not a scientific, frame of reference. Instead of proceeding
from the crude concept of price or income "parity" to more refined
formulation and practicable application of economic principles, they
have resorted to strong-arm claims for super-parity or to disingenuous
methods of computing parity that make it a farce and give us the sardonic
phrase "the political crops."
Besides the inevitable conventionalization of values and averaging
or ignoring of particular interests, besides inevitable sluggishness in
revision of policies or programs in the face of swift and frequent
changes in actual business situations, government economic direction
has a third weakness. It fails to collect the piper's fee from the actual
dancers. It does not link responsibility and reward. Questions are sub-