an official commission to design the palace or cathedral of their social
dreams? Does it signify a social engineer or institutional construction
company awarded a contract to translate these blueprints into reality?
No; I am not going to make an argument for implemented governmental
planning. On the contrary, I shall be concerned primarily with
the difference between mechanical building and social growth. There is
here no separation between artists or artisans and the inert materials
with which they work. Instead, we are dealing with a living process in
which desires, powers of choice, and internal constructive force infuse
both the builders and the building material. Evaluative human units
are not only the builders of our business edifice but are the building
itself.

The process by which many individuals of many talents may organize
themselves for the continuous discovery of their true economic interests
and the peaceful promotion of those interests in their most consistent
combination may be best described by the term "collective bargaining."
That phrase has no doubt acquired unfortunate connotations in many
minds. It is not my intention to evade or deny these shortcomings of
actual collective bargaining. On the other hand, I shall hope to show
that the degradation of the collective bargaining dogma has moved us
far and fast toward governmental control and to indicate a basic reason
why such control does not furnish a solution to the problem of organizing
economic life. Then I shall consider what seem to me the greater
merits of private but group-organized direction of business activities
and the nature of the collective bargaining process by which it may
best be promoted.

Collective bargaining is obviously a development within the general
field badly described as imperfect competition, better described as
monopolistic competition, and still better as administered prices. The
chief drawback of the latter term lies in the fact that it focuses attention
on the dictated character of many current business adjustments.
Collective bargaining, on the other hand, focuses attention on the elements
of negotiation in such settlements. Both qualities are generally
present, but it is well to consider the element of dictation first, on our
way to the examination of bilateral group negotiation as an organizing
process of economic life.

It is in the labor market that the phrase collective bargaining
originated, and it is there that the issues which it raises have been most
sharply defined. The subject matter of these collective bargains for
labor has been so strongly dominated by the unit price objective that
they are often referred to simply as wage bargains. In fact, however,
they have characteristically embraced or been contingent on understandings
as to the amount or character of labor to be delivered under a