tries where work is mainly the application of brute human force,
calling for energy and stamina, and where the intake of food is far
from enough to do a full day's work. On the "hungry" steppes and in
the teeming valleys of Asia, millions of adult males have so meager a
diet that they cannot do more than a few hours of hard work. To call
them underemployed does not seem pertinent. Under such circumstances
it is certainly meaningful to treat food partly as consumption
and partly as a current "producer good," as some Indian economists
have done [3]. Let us not forget that Western economists during the
early decades of industrialization and even in the time of Marshall and
Pigou often connected additional food for workers with increases in
labor productivity.
Let me now pass on to three major perplexing questions closely connected
with the riddle of economic growth. First, consider the longperiod
belhavior of the capital-income ratio. We were taught that a country
which amassed more reproducible capital relative to its land and
labor would employ such capital in greater "depth" because of its growing
abundance and cheapness. But apparently this is not what happens.
On the contrary, the estimates now available show that less of such
capital tends to be employed relative to income as economic growth proceeds.
Are we to infer that the ratio of capital to income has no relevance
in explaining either poverty or opulence? Or that a rise of this ratio is
not a prerequisite to economic growth? These questions raise fundamental
issues bearing on motives and preferences for holding wealth
as well as on the motives for particular investments and the stock of
capital thereby accumulated. For my purpose all that needs to be said
is that these estimates of capital-income ratios refer to only a part of
all capital. They exclude in particular, and most unfortunately, any
human capital. Yet human capital has surely been increasing at a rate
substantially greater than reproducible (nonhuman) capital. We cannot,
therefore, infer from these estimates that the stock of all capital
has been decreasing relative to income. On the contrary, if we accept the
not implausible assumption that the motives and preferences of people,
the technical opportunities open to them, and the uncertainty associated
with economic growth during particular periods were leading people to
maintain roughly a constant ratio between all capital and income, the
decline in the estimated capital-income ratio3 is simply a signal that
human capital has been increasing relatively not only to conventional
capital but also to income.
The bumper crop of estimates that show national income increasI
leave aside here the difficulties inherent in identifying and measuring both the nonhuman
capital and the income entering into estimates of this ratio. There are index number  and aggregation problems aplenty, and not all improvements in the quality of this capital
have been accounted for, as I shall note later.