mulas in which the "given" magnitudes must be largely guessed at.
Why engage in public discussion at all, unless one is content with what
seems to be our role to serve as an antidote to the poison being disseminated
by other social scientists, even economists? Is it not insulting
one's own intelligence?
The serious fact is that the bulk of the really important things that
economics has to teach are things that people would see for themselves
if they were willing to see. And it is hard to believe in the utility of
trying to teach what men refuse to learn or even seriously listen to.
What point is there in propagating sound economic principles if the
electorate is set to have the country run on the principle that the objective
in trade is to get rid of as much as possible and get as little
as possible in return?, if they will not see that imports are either paid
for by exports, as a method of producing the imported goods more
efficiently, or else are received for nothing?, or if they hold that
economy consists in having as many workers as possible assigned to a
given task instead of the fewest who are able to perform it? Of late,
I have a new and depressing example of popular economic thinking,
in the policy of arbitrary price-fixing. Can there be any use in explaining,
if it is needful to explain, that fixing a price below the freemarket
level will create a shortage and one above it a surplus? But the
public oh's and ah's and yips and yaps at the shortage of residential
housing and surpluses of eggs and potatoes as if these things presented
problems-any more than getting one's footgear soiled by deliberately
walking in the mud. And let me observe that rent freezing for example,
occurs not at all merely because tenants have more votes than landlords.
It reflects a state of mind, a mode of reasoning, even more discouraging
than blindness through self-interest-like protectionism
among our Middle-Western farmers.
One must grant that some critics of rationalistic economics seem to
have something, in their contention that theories based on the assumption
that men are reasoning beings run contrary to facts. But, from
the standpoint of policy, the question is, will they be more reasonable
in more sweeping political action, considering that it is absurd governmental
policies which lead to the criticism in the first place? However,
one notes that protectionism and "featherbedding" of organized workers,
and even monetary inflation are not (not often) carried to the
logical point at which all exchange and specialization through exchange
would stop, or all accumulated resources be eaten up. Explanation
of policy might conceivably get farther if we did take a more
psychological tack and instead of reasoning logically, ask why men
believe and practice nonsense but in general act so much less irrationally
than they argue-and what follows from that. Presumably