present bustling, expansive incarnation one wonders whether economic
analysis can provide all the answers.

Insofar, however, as French planning has made a significant contribution
to stability and growth its main impact, it appears to me,
has been on the degree of uncertainty surrounding both public and
private investment decisions. French planning does seem to have been
able to make growth targets credible to the people who make investment
decisions. This appears to have been made possible by an extraordinarily
close association of business men and public officials
assisted by competent technical advice. The tentative investment decisions
are binding neither on the government nor on business but
since representatives of both have participated actively in the planning
process there are reciprocal expectations that become difficult to
ignore. And as expectations have tended, by and large, to be fulfilled,
uncertainties surrounding new decisions diminish.

Reflection, however, on the institutional arrangements that make
such an enterprise possible and fruitful in France serves only to suggest
how unpracticable this model is for the United States, even if it
were considered to be desirable. Government accounts for from 35 to
40 per cent of capital formation in France and consequently public
investment decisions are matters of moment to business. A long cartel
tradition has accustomed French business to industry planning. The
postwar necessities of reconstruction and replacement required government-
business cooperation, and relationships useful to present planning
activities were developed.

Inadequacies of capital markets in France have encouraged government
financing of private enterprise and close control of security
issues. French labor has either not been strong enough to inject itself
effectively into the planning process or has been willing to leave these
matters to governmnent and business. Possibly the softening of partisan
activities and the downgrading of parliamentary procedures under a
quasi-dictatorial regime have encouraged a certain degree of dirigisme
in the economy. In any case it should be obvious that there is little in
the French situation that is directly relevant to U.S. practice.
The same thing must be said of the Netherlands, though the Dutch
do not attempt anything as ambitious as the direction of investment
among sectors. The so-called aggregative planning of the Netherlands
is scarcely more than effective stabilization policy with growth left to
take care of itself. Even so, the institutional relationships that make
this policy effective are largely lacking in the United States. Although
there has been no great pressure for public ownership in the Netherlands,
government operation of railways, public utilities, and mines
and extensive participation in land reclamation schemes assures a