competition, a policy of laissez faire can and should in general be
followed.
If in 1885 this perfect-market view was somewhat overshadowed by
the view that in various circumstances positive government action is
needed to supplement the regulatory influence of competition, it seems
fair to say that since that date there has been a recurring tendency for
economists to revert to a laissez-faire position. Indeed at the Association'
s fiftieth birthday party this tendency received some attention.
Frank A. Fetter, the toastmaster on that occasion, spoke of laissez
faire as "that most persistent concept ... with more than the proverbial
nine lives of the cat.""1
That was 1935. But the tendency is still with us. Consider, for example,
the school of thought that Kenneth Boulding, naming it after
Pareto, calls "Paretian welfare economics." In his survey article on this
school Boulding makes clear the thoroughgoingly laissez-faire nature
of its usual economic-policy conclusions. The main ones are "a strong
predisposition in favor of 'perfect markets' "; an insistence on "marginal
cost pricing"; and "a general predisposition against" taxes that are
deemed to "distort the . . . structure of economic activity"'2 (in other
words against taxes that serve any regulatory purpose).
Since "Paretian welfare economics" is pure theory, its policy conclusions
can be pure laissez faire-so pure that they seem pertinent to
a hypothetical model rather than to the real world. But not all Paretians
concur. And on the more specific level the negative conception of
public economic policy is less extreme, though it is still negative. Those
who take the perfect-market view of the regulatory function of competition
tend to think of various government actions in regard to private,
nonpublic-utility (nonfinancial) businesses as interferences with our
free enterprise system, or-to use Boulding's phrase-actions that "distort
the . . . structure of economic activity."
On the other hand those who take the more painstaking, institutionalist
view of competition and the profit system tend to think of nmost
government actions in this broad area as supplements to competition
designed to make it and the profit system work better. The issue, then,
is between regarding government actions in this broad enterprise areal
as interferences and regarding them as supplementary to the regulatory
function of competition.
But there is more to this issue. The perfect-market view tends to
treat differences in competition, provided it is reasonably fair, merely
as a question of more or less. The institutional-supplements view regards