following are percentages of the sum of the three incomes, not of total
national income because military and government civilian incomes are
excluded.

To be noted most conspicuously are the following:
1. How much better labor fared, relatively, than business and agriculture
in the case of extreme depression such as in 1932. This will be
even more the case in the future because of social security and cornpensation
provisions in company-union contracts.
2. How in the ordinary ups and downs in the economy, capital's
share remains pretty stable, whereas labor's share is a little low when
agriculture's is high, and vice versa.
3. An upward trend for labor and downward for capital and agriculture.

We are now in position to consider more carefully the connections
between agricultural prosperity and business cycles, and specifically
the views of those who believe that business depressions are "farm
led and farm fed." Most of you will recall claims that there would have
been a real recession in 1949-50 except for the farm price supports.
Statements like these were made repeatedly by several of the agricultural
news commentators in the following years. But with a group
such as is in this room, a brief and simple statement on this subject
will suffice and will be very familiar to most of you. The falling off of
demand which is the first event in the sequence that makes up a
business cycle is almost always a decline in the demand for industrial
products, particularly those of heavy industry. This is followed by
factory unemployment and a decline in the demand for consuimer
goods, including the raw materials of food and clothing. This is likely
to be reflected in a decline in prices of farm products before very long,
especially if the recession persists and grows, because of the inelasticity
of the demand for these products. Quite commonly farmn product prices
weaken rather early in a recession, and they may weaken a good deal
in two or three years of recession. Farmers and farm households in
turn reduce their purchases of farm equipment, automobiles, and
consumer durables. Even though farm and farm family expenditures
are now only 8 per cent of the national total, certain industries feel
keenly the loss of farm demand in such a situation. But the effect on