enterprise in the inventive process. Just as the modern corporation
has replaced the individual as coordinator of production and manager
of business, so invention has become a group process. Research teams
working in well-equipped laboratories under centralized guidance and
according to well-defined plans have largely replaced the lone investigator
whose research was circumscribed only by his curiosity, his intellectual
ability, and his imagination. Corporations have sought to discover
and foster not the individual inventor but the well-rounded
scientist, loyal to the organization and willing to subordinate his personal
interests to group interests and to gear his endeavors to those of
like-minded colleagues, interested in discovering new ways of applying
existing knowledge to the commercialization of new products and
processes rather than in carrying on basic research. The following
statement by an executive of a large industrial corporation illustrates
the trend towards group activity: "Except in certain research assignments,
few specialists in a large company ever work alone. There is
little room for virtuoso performances" [33, p. 2143.
The federal government, which directly and indirectly through tax
policy has become the chief sponsor and financier of research activities,
has greatly accelerated the shift to teamwork in research directed
toward practical ends. In research contracts that government agencies
awarded in 1953, 1954, and 1955, 93 per cent of the $5.6 billion total
went to applied rather than fundamental research [33, p. 218]. It is
a reasonable assumption that virtually all was spent on corporate
or other group projects, rather than on research by individual investigators.
John H. Troll, physicist and vice president of Electronics
Corporation of America, commenting on the government's subsidizing
private research in defense contracts, had this to say:
This approach has debilitated all government research facilities, leaving
research and development vital to our defense to be performed under contracts
by private firms, under a system that leads to the selection of
contractors on the basis of size and financial status rather than scientific
capability. This in turn has brought about an "organization man" approach
to research that destroys individual creativity in the scientist by
leading to a sort of creeping collectivism more usually associated with
the Soviet Union [29, p. 22].

Philanthropic foundations confronted with the task of giving away
hundreds of millions of dollars have generally found it convenient to
support carefully designed research projects involving the joint effort
of groups rather than the work of single scholars. The scholar who
requests financial aid for his research lacks the glamor of a "big
operation"; his only qualifications may be a talent for research, a
thirst for knowledge, and an insatiable curiosity. As a former foundation