Racial discrimination and religious discrimination are still widespread.
Professional associations and governmental bodies also hinder entry;
for example, into medicine. Such purposeful interference keeps the
investment in this form of human capital substantially below its optimum
[7].

4. It is indeed elementary to stress the greater imperfections of the
capital market in providing funds for investment in human beings
than for investment in physical goods. Much could be done to reduce
these imperfections by reforms in tax and banking laws and by changes
in banking practices. Long-term private and public loans to students
are warranted.

5. Internal migration, notably the movement of farm people into
tindustry, made necessary by the dynamics of our economic progress,
requires substantial investments. In general, families in which the husbands
and wives are already in the late thirties cannot afford to make
these investments because the remaining payoff period for them is too
short. Yet society would gain if more of them would pull stakes and
move because, in addition to the increase in productivity currently,
the children of these families would be better located for employment
when they were ready to enter the labor market. The case for making
some of these investments on public account is by no means weak. Our
farm programs have failed miserably these many years in not coming
to grips with the costs and returns from off-farm migration.
6. The low earnings of particular people have long been a matter of
public concern. Policy all too frequently concentrates only on the effects,
ignoring the causes. No small part of the low earnings of many Negroes,
Puerto Ricans, Mexican nationals, indigenous migratory farm workers,
poor farm people and some of our older workers, reflects the failure to
have invested in their health and education. Past mistakes are, of course,
bygones, but for the sake of the next generation we can ill afford to continue
making the same mistakes over again.

7. Is there a substantial underinvestment in human beings other
than in these depressed groups? [2] This is an important question for
economists. The evidence at hand is fragmentary. Nor will the answer be
easily won. There undoubtedly have been overinvestments in some
skills, for example, too many locomotive firemen and engineers, too
many people trained to be farmers, and too many agricultural economists!
Our schools are not free of loafers and some students lack the
necessary talents. Nevertheless, underinvestment in knowledge and
skill, relative to the amounts invested in nonhuman capital would
appear to be the rule and not the exception for a number of reasons. The
strong and increasing demands for this knowledge and skill in laborers
are of fairly recent origin and it takes time to respond to them. In responding