which were available for, rather than their relative degree of use, it
did not make allowance for the idle capital in periods of depression nor
for the more intensive use of capital during years of prosperity.
Similarly, our index of labor did not make allowance for failures to
work full time in the bad years, nor for overtime hours which were
worked in the good years. It was, therefore, to be expected that the
actual product (P) would exceed the theoretical product (P') in years
of prosperity and would fall below it in years of depression. So in fact
it did in every year except the war years of 1918 and 1919. Professor
Cobb and I, therefore, regarded these deviations as additional evidence
of the general validity of the formula for normal times.
Still another striking bit of evidence was found in the fact that under
perfect competition with a production formula of this type we would
expect a factor to receive as its share of the product, the proportion
indicated by its exponent. From the income studies of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, we found that labor's share of the net
value product of manufacturing during the decade 1909-1918, was
estimated at 74.1 per cent, or almost precisely the value of the exponent
for labor.

Professor Cobb and I embodied the results of our inquiries in a
paper which we read before this Association exactly twenty years ago
tonight.9 We then determined to analyze more of such time series.
Cobb computed indexes of labor, capital, and product in Massachusetts
manufacturing for the period 1890-1926, and found the value of
k to be .743. Interestingly enough, it was also found that the average
of labor's share of the net value of the product in that state for that
period was .74, or a virtual identity with the value of k.'0 A similar
study, which was made in Chicago by Mr. Director for New South
Wales manufacturing for the period 1901-1927, found k to have a value
of .65.

There the matter more or less rested when my book, The Theory of
Wages, appeared in 1934. Three years later, with the aid of Mrs. Marjorie
Handsaker, I resumed our analysis of time series, and after
working up data for Victorian manufacturing for the period 1907-1929,
we found the value of k under the k and 1-k formula to be .7 1." Labor's
share of the net product or W/P was found to be .61 for this period.
We then introduced two important new features into our investigations.