than consumption is the crux of the difficulty, monetary policy is to be
preferred to fiscal measures desigined to increase aggregate demand.
If fiscal measures are nevertlheless used they should clearly emphasize
tax reduction rather than increase of government expenditures. And
in no case should fiscal measures prevent a balancing of the budget
over the business cycle. The business case tends to emphasize growth,
mainly through increase in plant-and-equipment expenditures, rather
than stabilization. Indeed, there is some tendency to deny the existence
of a stabilization problem in any other sense than that which
relates to the price level and balance of payments. The high unemployment
figures tend to be attributed to the vagaries of U.S. employment
statistics or to the unwillingness of labor to accept employment
in the areas in which it is offered. Higher growth rates in various
European countries are attributed to tax and monetary policies that
are more adapted to a "capitalistic" environment than those of the
United States.
The analysis of the problem as presented by labor spokesmen tends
to rely heavily on the purchasing power argument. Increasing purchasing
power by increasing wage rates is now, perhaps, somewhat passe because
of the rather too obvious connection with wage costs and prices.
Fiscal policy is currently the preferred route and increase in government
expenditures has much to recommend it in view of deficiencies
in services that only government can provide. If, however, tax reduction
is preferred, cuts should be limited to the lower end of the scale
where tax relief will increase consumption rather than savings. Investment
is considered to be a function of output and profits will be fully
adequate both as a source of savings and as an incentive to invest when
the economy is operating at close to capacity. Collective bargaining as it
presently functions is essentially satisfactory and there is no case either
for reducing the bargaining power of unions or for administrative control
of wages and prices. The balance-of-payments problem tends to be
somewhat neglected in labor pronouncement, except as it is affected
by the investment abroad of U.S. capital.
It is not my purpose here to evaluate either the business or the
labor argument. It would be difficult, however, for such different
analyses and recommendations to continue to exist side by side were
it not for a substantial area of ignorance concerning the relation of
magnitudes relevant to stabilization policy. Furthermore, the presence
of ignorance seems, in a perverse sort of way, to harden conflicts and
to exacerbate group relationships. It might be thought that the existence
of considerable uncertainty concerning the effects of a proposed
course of action might lead to a more cautious statement of claims and
counterclaims. In fact, it seems to produce the reverse behavior. Since