state, abridges the freedom of the individual to spend his
money as he chooses. Economic laws do not abridge but rather describe
the choice of individuals and the outgrowth of these choices in market
phenomena.

This same contrast appears when we shift our viewpoint from a
generic to a quantitative basis. Even when ethical or political law
indicates a direction of choice which the individual would elect if left
to his own free choice, it cannot in the nature of the case result in the
same quantitative solution, except quite by accident. Thus a moral
code may impose temperance in the consumption of alcoholic drinks;
but the individual's acceptance of the principle does not give any
precise quantitative solution. A public spirited person may vote for a
social security program, recognize that it must be supported by taxation,
and yet try to avoid paying a larger sum in personal income tax
than necessary. Generally speaking, the expression of choice through
the ballot, whether at the popular or parliamentary level, becomes less
and less comfortable to the free choice of each individual, the larger
the group to which the measure is applied. Political decisions, by their
very nature, involve choices made for groups, and are thus at best
approximations of what and how much the individuals would choose.
Economic decisions are, on the other hand, marginal-that is, they
conform to "the little more, the little less."

"The little more, the little less" lies at the heart of economic thinking
-in the analysis of income allocation, of costs of production, of outlays
on advertising and other selling devices, of spending vs. saving, of investing
vs. hoarding money, and the like. But the "little more and the
little less" has, practically speaking, to be a matter of individual decision,
since decisions on a moral or political basis almost certainly
involve, by comparison to individual budgets, very gross magnitudes.
Economics is thus individualistic in a profound sense.
Most wants, beyond some very primitive physical urges, are "social
wants" in the sense of their being imbued with the tastes, morals, and
customs of the surrounding society. But the subject of these wants
is still the individual. The same is true of "collective wants," that is,
wants which either can (practically) be satisfied only by processes
which result in the production of the good or service for a number of
people, or which require a number of participants in the enjoyment of
the product. The subject of the want is still the individual. Economic
guidance of production for wants of these characters still requires a
free-market expression of preferences.'
