economists did not know what had hit them. Marxian economists, of
course, took the economic catastrophe simply as a confirmation of
Marx's theory that depressions would become more and more severe
until the capitalist system would come down in a final big crash. (In
the 1960's this view has lost conviction, even among the faithful.)
Others who lacked the prophet's guidance through the maze of world
history had a harder time to explain the slump. Some spoke vaguely of
big real maladjustments in the structure of production that had accumulated
during the 1920's and others of the coincidence, accidental
or otherwise, of the contraction phase of several superimposed types
of concurrent economic fluctuations.3 The Keynesians later fashioned
their theory of secular stagnation.
From the present vantage point, the explanation of the exceptional
virulence of the Great Depression seems much simpler. It was mainly
due to the wholesale destruction of money, which in turn was largely the
consequence of institutional weaknesses and incredibly poor policies,
on the national and international level. Let me mention only a few of
these. The collapse of the American banking system, the bankruptcy of
thousands of banks, and the overly timid3a monetary policy which failed
to counteract energetically and to stop the raging deflation explain,
I venture to say, the "darkest hues" (Schumpeter) of the depression in
the United States. Money supply contracted by something like 30 per
cent from 1929 to 1933. The deflation could not have been nearly as
severe if there had existed then, as there exists now, effective deposit
insurance, or if the United States, instead of the archaic unit banking
system, had had an efficient branch banking system like Great Britain,4
not to mention "100 per cent banking."
The mistakes of the early New Deal of pressing hastily for often
poorly conceived reforms, of fostering monopolies of business (N.R.A.)
and labor and thus raising costs and frightening investors, instead of
concentrating at first all energies on expansionary measures to bring
about quick recovery (as Keynes among others recommended), explain
why in 1939 unemployment was still over 17 per cent. Policy mistakes of
a similar kind and magnitude were made in several other important
countries, for example in pre-Nazi Germany and under the popular
front government in France. Just as Roosevelt ignored Keynes' sugSchumpeter
himself did not really take seriously his suggestion that the coincidence of  a Kondratieff, Juglar and Kitchin depression accounted for the severity of the 1930 depression.  On the contrary, he said that "the darkest hues of cyclical depressions . . . are due to adventitious
circumstances." See [19, p. 1501.