empirical counterpart to the theoretical construct) is required, because
the explanation of changes in prices, inputs, and outputs is at the same
time an explanation of decisions of some particular firms, in the sense
of organizations of men acting in particular, sometimes unpredictable,
ways. Various attempts have been made to develop patterns of oligopo-
listic and monopolistic conduct and to correlate these patterns with
types of organization or with types of personalities exercising ultimate
decision-making power. The success has thus far been small; even if
the decision-making (say, pricing) in a particular firm was sometimes
satisfactorily modeled (for example, in a simulated computer pro-
gram), the model has usually not been transferable to other cases, to
predict decisions in other firms. I do not recall, moreover, that the be-
havior patterns in these cases were shown to be inconsistent with the
postulate of profit maximization.
Under these circumstances, retreat to simpler, less realistic models
of firms in oligopoly and monopoly positions is indicated. The first ap-
proach is to apply the polypolistic model, in full awareness that the ac-
tual facts are entirely different. In many instances the use of the po-
lypolistic model for situations which in our judgment would merit to
be labeled as oligopolistic will still yield satisfactory explanations and
predictions. Where this is not so, the analyst will resort to the use of
models of oligopolistic or monopolistic firms, postulating the simplest
possible pattern of action and reaction, dispensing with all peculiar at-
titudes and "special" strategies. Only where these simple models of oli-
gopolistic and monopolistic firms yield quite unsatisfactory predictions
will the analyst need to go further, to more special types of behavior,
provided he finds it worth while. It depends on the research interests
and on the problems under examination how much effort one wishes to
invest in behavioral research where the findings hold little promise of
yielding generalizations of wide applicability.
There are, however, some simple models of oligopolistic behavior