it very far. But if the monopolist "acts like a monopolist" and his
monopoly pertains to an important commodity or service, there usually
ensues a political decision which suppresses this individual's free choice.
It is significant for the validity of my thesis, however, that this decision
characteristically takes the form of attempting to supplant the monopoly
by competition, or of attempting to regulate the monopoly and to simulate
competitive results. In either event the aim is to restore results
similar to those which would appear on the market from the free choice
of individuals, except for the offending monopolist.
Economics has successfully described the outcome of competitive
market situations where individual choice is free. Its success in analyzing
various hues of monopoly varies in about an inverse proportion as
monopoly elements grow and free choice dwindles. Thus simple monopoly,
with freedom as to price or amount purchased on the demand
side, yields a definite solution. Two-sided monopoly with each monopolist
having the power to dictate price but not quantity yields a
determinate solution of quantity but the division of the price is indeterminate.
Between these extremes and competition are intermediate
cases where not one but several producers dominate the market; and
for these cases, theoretical economics is able to state only zones or
areas of probable solutions on various suppositions as to the freedom of
choice of the individual firms. Efforts to press the frontier of economic
analysis farther into this territory are, of course, welcome and necessary.
But as we pass gradually from situations in which economic activity
is guided by individual free choice toward more (uncontrolled)
monopoly and toward more political choice, the substance of economics
comes to be more and more prescinded and more tentative. At the
limit, where all economic activity is controlled by the state and all
decisions are political, economics expires and the economist is put out to
grass. He no longer has any criteria of income allocation, costs, money
holdings, savings, foreign trade, etc., which he could use to test the
arbitrary decisions of the authority. If asked to appraise the efficiency
of the controlled economy, he would have to ask for the restoration of
free choice in one or many fields, in order to permit him to see how
matters actually stand. Thus there undoubtedly is such a thing as a
government economist, but only by virtue of the fact that enough decisions
are made outside the government to permit government decisions
to be tested by economic criteria.
The thesis which I maintain can now be briefly restated. Economics
studies the application of limited resources to wants which are less
limited. The limitation of resources reveals itself in costs; and at bottom
all costs excepting natural resources are human, that is, they are costs
to individual beings. At bottom, also, unsatisfied wants are the wants of