under the Marshall Plan, unless some provision is made for feeding
dollars into it. The maldistribution of reserves has played a major role
in the deterioration of multilateral trade, which even before the Second
World War had become pronounced. This is a short-rtun problem only
in the sense that it has given rise to frequent short-run crises. Since the
last war, European reserves, and particularly British reserves, have displayed
a biennial pattern, with crises in every odd year. There is some
truth in the view that if European, and particularly British, reserves
were larger, some of these storms could be ridden out. The alternative,
as experience has already shown, is further emphasis on exchange controls
and other discriminatory practices, and on further exchange-rate
adjustments, and, quite probably, further deterioration of multilateral
trade.23
These problems are symptomatic of deeper-seated maladjustments
arising out of long-run cumulative changes in the relative positions of
the trading countries. The great commercial revolution for which Adam
Smith provided the rationale re-made the internal economies of the
Western European countries. This was the great movement from the
center. It bestowed on those countries enormous advantages. Through
export of capital, labor, and entrepreneurship, as well as goods, they
were able to concentrate capital and labor on a small amount of land,
resulting in a population density now four times ours, in increasing
return industries and to buy the products of increasing cost industries
from abroad. But in doing so, they have become committed to a particular
organization of their productive effort. As such countries lose
their initial advantages and foreign markets are cut off or seriously
reduced through the growing productivity advantages of other countries
developed in the process, it becomes increasingly difficult to find alternatives,
either domestic or foreign. This is the basis of the urge for
European integration, which has been present under some form or
name ever since the Marshall Plan began. Whether we have been
making any headway with this problem in its long-run aspects, as
against mere reconstruction from war, still remains a much unsettled
question; and one now confused anew by the rearmament program.
Meanwhile the United States, which in earlier stages of development
absorbed European labor and capital and provided an expanding
market for European manufactures in exchange for our food and raw
materials, to our great mutual benefit, has in its later stages of development
presented a growing threat of chronic world imbalance. Occupy-
23This subject played a major part in the United Nations' special report on National  and International Measures for Full Employment (Lake Success, United Nations, 1949).  It is discussed anew in the most recent United Nations' special report on Measures for
International Stability (New York, United Nations, 1951).