technological progress, new commodities, and new industries. Their
economic theory has the dynamic quality, but it lacks the sense of
repose that we associate with true art. But let us pass that by. The
practical consideration is that they fail to remember that many new
gadgets, and even whole new industries, are in the main substitutes
for old ones, and do not add, quantitatively, either to employment or
to the supply of goods. A good deal that looks like expansion is merely
ripping out one machine to put in another, with all the tremendous
premature obsolescence costs in the aggregate involved. It is an error
to assume that technological research and technological change are
the only assured bases for expanding employment. As long as there
are 20 million (is it?) houses without bathtubs, it is not essential that
we scrap our facilities for making white tubs and go over to pink or
yellow ones.
To come back for a moment from these long-run considerations to
the situation we shall face in the immediate post-war years: We shall
unquestionably need billions of dollars' worth of plant expansion. But
there is grave danger that business, in its enthusiasm and its desire to
cash in on the huge backlog of consumer demand, will unpremeditatedly
plunge the country into a runaway boom, bound to be followed by
depression. There is danger that within ten years we may build the
new capital we would normally build in thirty years, and that then
we shall find ourselves vainly hunting for investment opportunity for
an unmanageable volume of savings-if, in the meantime, the habit
of saving has not been effectively discouraged. For a time, we can
rely on the export of capital for the industrialization of the backward
countries, provided we wish to take the risks and are willing to face
the political problems involved. But sooner or later, this outlet, too,
will close. Considering the accelerated tempo of modern enterprise,
we may reach such an impasse within a generation.
Today, business men fear a scarcity of investment funds. On the
other hand, some economists think the problem will be to find investment
outlet for the huge annual volume of savings which they assume
will continue to be made. Business men want savings for expansion;
these economists want expansion to absorb savings. In the long run,
both are wrong. The error of business is failure to understand the relation
between cumulative saving and the consumer market. The error
in theory is the assumption that the propensity to save is constant
through time, regardless of institutional changes.
The distribution of income. The relation of the volume of saving to
the distribution of income is well known. Most of our billions of dollars
of annual savings normally come from the upper income brackets, and
from corporate surpluses. The way to prevent excess investment funds