all, some "opiate," or some effective agent to prevent their demanding
their rights. The only alternative to belief in supernatural sanctions of
an existing system quite far from just is that intelligence shall be
fully aware of its own narrow limitations and be supplemented by a
high order of tolerance, and self-sacrifice, the patient acceptance of the
best all-round choice among evils. Especially, as the world is built,
the chances of loss are overwhelmingly greater than the chances of
gain in any effort to escape the ills we have by flying to others that we
know not of. Since order is the absolute requisite of civilized life, we
must stick to the order that is, until there is a reasonable agreement on
changes that will be on balance beneficial.
The balance will always be hard to strike and entirely a matter of
judgment, not of formula, a balance between principles that conflict,
while each claims to be absolute. The danger now, in the world and in
the West, is that freedom will be thrown away, for a promise or hope
of justice, but with an actual result of neither justice nor freedom, and
very likely the suicide of civilization in war without rules. The world
could be heading toward a new age of essentially religious wars,
ideological wars. Historically this would be nothing new, except for its
scale and for the destructiveness of modern military technology. Otherwise,
Europe is reverting to form. For as I have said, Communism, in
its social program or pretensions, is largely a revival of historicalecclesiastical
Christianity, with the church more effectively merged
in one all-powerful state. From the downfall of the Roman imperium to
the age of liberalism, Europe lived under one or more dogmatic, intolerant,
persecuting and violently proselyting religions-claiming possession
of the formula for salvation they could not be or do otherwise
-and much of the time in a state of war between two or more such
religions. In Christianity, surely, we find the supreme "irony of history"
: that an original teaching centered ethically in humility, meekness,
self-denial, and self-sacrifice became organized into corporations
whose dignitaries have hardly been matched for arrogant grasping,
using, and flaunting of power and wealth and for insistence on prerogative
to the borderline of worship. One turns to Dostoievsky's
famous speech of the Grand Inquisitor, for any adequate portrayal of
this situation and its sinister indications of the nature of human nature.
The plea of Communism, like that of Christianity, is justice, under
absolute authority, ignoring freedom. (The former does extol progress,
and progress through science, both of which Christianity despised; by
the same argument, Communism is, overtly less devoted to law and tradition,
more openly claims the right to ignore or break the law.) For
Liberalism, the primary value is freedom, self-limited by laws made by
the community, ideally by general assent, in practice by representatives