
fact. See also D. H. Robertson [16]. It should be observed, however, that freer trade be-  tween the industrial countries, although it may be less valuable than trade between industrial  and tropical countries on comparative cost grounds, can be beneficial through stimulating  competition and counteracting monopolistic tendencies. This effect of free trade has been  stressed by J. S. Mill and reiterated by modern theorists of integration, e.g., by Tibor
Scitovsky and Harry Johnson.
1 In underdeveloped countries the theory has been widely accepted that in less developed  countries import restrictions do not reduce the volume of imports or exports; they merely  cause a shift of imports from, say, luxury goods to capital goods. In the developed industrial  countries, it is said, the classical rule still applies that import restrictions reduce the volume  of trade in both directions. This is the official doctrine of the U.N. Economic Commission  for Latin America (ECLA). See, e.g., [23, esp. p. 61]. The reason usually given is that these  countries spend all their export proceeds anyway. This, of course, overlooks that protection  draws factors of production into the protected industries from the export sector. Only under  extreme and entirely unrealistic assumptions concerning the existence of large masses of  disguised unemployment (including that of skilled workers), of surplus capacity, and very  elastic capital supply could the conclusion be overthrown that export supply will contract as  a consequence of massive import substitution brought about by heavy protection.
20Kindleberger's figures are not quite comparable with the U.N. figures because his area  breakdown is a different one. The figure quoted in the text refers to industrial Europe's terms  of trade with "all other areas," i.e., the world excluding the rest of Europe, the United States,  and the "countries of recent settlement." With the last-mentioned area the index of industrial
Europe's terms of trade stood at 138 in 1938 (1928 = 100).