business is still powerless to secure it. If there is, perchance, here
and there a business leader who sees its need, he nevertheless is powerless.
Private enterprise lacks within its own organization the central
authority which alone can secure inter-industry balance. Here, if
anywhere, is necessary that central government control to which business
so vociferously objects, and which many competent economists
view with misgivings. But without such central control, especially the
rational control of investment, it is difficult to see how we are to attain
the continuity and stability of an efficient and dependable social economy.
The common reply to all this is that competition and a free
market obtain this balance. But the answer is not convincing. For one
thing, the cobweb theorem applies to industry as well as to agriculture.
Call it what you please, view it with caution as you will, I see no
escape from centralized regulation of conditions which affect the whole
nation. For this reason, I have little sympathy with attempts to revive
the states' rights issue, and for the same reason I hope that business
men will exercise caution in accepting the term "free enterprise" in
too literal a sense.
There remain for very brief comment the other two great problems:
the distribution of money income, and the savings-investment problem.
What little I can take the time to say about these problems will be
elementary, and will seem not only superficial but dogmatic, since we
here touch on fundamental questions, both of theory and of policy,
on which economists almost violently disagree.
The market problem. The problem of private enterprise is fundamentally
that of market for its product, for it is the market which ties
together production, distribution, and consumption in one great, integrated,
going-concern process.
Certain, seemingly self-evident truths should be kept in mind. All
the demand for goods comes from final consumers. The consumer pays
the freight-all of it-all the costs of production, including profits.
This may not be clear in the short run in an expanding economy, but
it must always hold true for the long run. Second, consumers cannot
buy unless they have money to buy with. And third, failure of income
recipients to spend their income currently on consumption goods will
cause a glut in the market. This, in fact, has been the normal condition
with us. The market is nearly always a buyers', not a sellers' market.
Oversupply is the usual state of the market under private enterprise
as we have known it. In other words, the economy is continually out of
balance because it lacks that equality between aggregate business
costs (including profits) and aggregate consumer expenditure essential
to the continuous clearing of the market. For this continuity, there
must be an uninterrupted circuit flow of money from consumers to