and other discriminatory practices; for competition frequently means
discrimination. In fact a competitor that gets ahead in an industry may
do so in substantial part by developing business connections, i.e., arrangements
that give him preferential treatment in terms of financing,
in terms of purchase, in access to market information, in the award of
private contracts, even preferential treatment in the administration of
a public office. The fact that various businessmen who have become
public officials seem to have found it difficult to understand our conflict-
of-interest laws bears witness to the prevalence of such discriminatory
arrangements in the business world. They are not only prevalent;
many businessmen seem to think freedom to make such arrangements
is an essential feature of our free-enterprise system.
If there are significant restrictions on unjustifiable discrimination in
prices and other terms of trade today they must be attributed largely
to various supplements to the regulatory influence of competition. Both
public opinion and business ethics impose such restrictions. And there
are some legal restraints too, e.g., in the Robinson-Patman Act. But
there should be quite general agreement among economists that the
right to develop business connections that give a firm preferential treatment
is not a necessary part of our free enterprise system and that
there is need to eliminate the many unjustifiable discriminatory practices
still extant in the business world. The problem here is partly one
of what means can be used to eliminate such practices but importantly
also it is one of how to distinguish these practices from differentials in
prices and other terms of trade that are in accord with the public interest.
I hope the problem of how to make this distinction will be given
far more intensive study during the next several years than it has yet
received.

III

Although our free enterprise system operates without any central
management, production is in large part carried on in organizations
each of which specializes in particular phases of the productive process
and each of which is under the direction of a management. Hence it
has sometimes been said that while our economy has no general manager
it has a large number of functional foremen. Because there are
many organizations engaged in the productive process-many business
enterprises each of which is a social organization, not merely a single
individual-our economy involves the central-management function of
providing for the functional foremen-determining who shall act as
foremen, clothing them with authority to act as foremen, and imposing
on others who participate in the work of any business enterprise the
duty to obey its management.
