important managerial objectives of a type that can be reduced to quan-
titative analysis and to combine them in a single manageable "objec-
tive function." This third approach inerges marginalism with manage-
rialism in that it integrates money profits with other managerial goals
within one formula of "maximizing behavior."
The question is whether managerial marginalism is prescribed for
general application or only for so-called noncompetitive cases. Its most
prominent proponents prefer to use the old formula, based on profit
maximization, in situations where competition is effective and manage-
rial discretion therefore narrowly circumscribed. In the next sections
we shall discuss matters that at first blush may seem unrelated to this
issue but on reflection can shed indirect light on it.
The Analogy of the Theoretical Automobile Driver
One of the best remembered points in my exposition was the use of
an analogy designed to warn against mistaking theoretical variables
and their links for realistic descriptions of observable processes. This
was the analogy of the "theory of overtaking" automobiles on the high-
ways [21,pp. 534-35].
Analogies are often misleading, but in this particular case it served
its main purpose: to show that the theoretical variables need not be
estimated and the theoretical equations need not be solved through ac-
tual calculation by the actors in the real world whose idealized types
are supposed to perform these difficult operations in the models con-
structed for the explanation of recorded observations.2 The critics of
marginal analysis believed they had refuted it if they could show that
the exact numerical calculations of marginal magnitudes-cost, reve-
nue, productivity-were difficult or impossible to perform by real deci-
sion-makers.
Yet, my analogy was only partially successful. An implication which
should have been obvious has been widely overlooked: that the type of
action assumed to be takein by the theoretical actor in the model under
specified conditions need not be expected and cannot be predicted ac-
tually to be taken by any particular real actor. The empiricist's incli-
nation is to verify the theoretically deduced action by testing individ-
ual behavior, although the theory serves only to explain and predict
effects of mass behavior.
We may illustrate this again by means of the same analogy, the the-
ory of overtaking. Assume a change of driving conditions occurs, say,
that the roads have become wet and slippery and fog has reduced visi-