terms, was eventually reflected, on the theoretical level, in the
development by Chamberlin, Robinson, Stackelberg, and many others
of the theories of imperfect and monopolistic competition and oligopoly
which from the late 'twenties onward appeared to have modified, elaborated
and complicated our older and simpler concepts of competition
and monopoly.

This development reflected recognition that the pricing process,
whether for goods or for the factors of production was no longer carried
on simply between individuals in the traditional free market. Instead the
capitalistic economy had become increasingly corporate and organizational.


My main concern tonight is with the question of the nature of our
own economic system. If we could at one time call our economic system
capitalism, meaning by that a system characterized by private property,
individual enterprise, laissez faire and competition, and if we still call
our system capitalism, have we changed the meaning of the word? In
other words, have these characteristic economic institutions of capitalism
been fundamentally impaired or altered?

At least the New Dealers among us were in nearly complete agreement
by the time the great depression had reached its depth in the early
nineteen-thirties that American industry was no longer characteristically
competitive, even if some still believed that old-style competition
could and should be restored. Others believed instead that since competition
no longer satisfactorily regulated the economy, laissez faire might
have to be abandoned and comprehensive government controls substituted.


The mass unemployment of the great depression was considered by
New Dealers the tangible evidence of the failure of the imperfectly
competitive system to function effectively. It was, of course, this mass
unemployment which was responsible for the political support which
the New Deal obtained in urban areas. Insufficiency of total wage payments
of unorganized or ineffectively organized workers to purchase the
products of corporate industry was considered a cause of "scarcity in
the midst of plenty." Rigid prices for manufactured goods while farm
products had to be sold in a competitive market were also held responsible
for the deficiency in purchasing power reflected in the unsatisfactory
relation between the prices of industrial goods and the incomes
of farmers and laborers available for the purchase of these goods. This
was and largely still is the rationale for the New Deal system of price
supports in agriculture.

If there was any doubt as to whether the economic system was characterized
by competition and by laissez faire before the New Deal
there seemed little doubt in the minds of most conservatives, that this