isolated areas in this country, corporations provide such services as
housing, medical care, recreation, and education, which are merely in-
cidental to their business activities, but often require a great deal of
time from their executives and their boards of directors. Greatly on
the credit side is what has been called "the public service revolution,"
manifested in the statements of many corporation executives emphasiz-
ing that service to all interested parties is an objective of American
business, ranking ahead of the quest for ever larger profits.
On a former occasion I took the position,8 that contrary to the fears of
many economists and of large groups in the general public, American
trade unions do not have nearly as great assets, influence, and power
as have our large corporations. I still hold this view, but recognize that
unions, too, profoundly affect the American way of life and in respects
other than those narrowly considered economic. In its broader implica-
tions, the labor movement is a manifestation of the rise in the social
order of the element in our population which was "born on the wrong
side of the tracks" or whose ancestors were latecomers in this country.
The advance of this group into the middle class appears to be one of the
causes of the phenomenon, which Sumner H. Slichter and others have
noted, of the growing moderation in the American views on public issues.
Many others of the numerous present-day associations also have
great importance. What has been said about corporations and labor
unions must suffice to illustrate both the significance of the associational
element in our system of free enterprise and the desirability of a broader
approach to many public policy questions than is customarily taken by
theoretical economists.
Pointing in the same direction is "the managerial revolution." This is
the divorce of control from ownership in the large corporation, which
has all but become complete. In the large corporation, the functions
usually still called those of the enterpreneur are now performed by pro-
fessional managers. Management itself is a group, rather than an in-
dividual. Legally managers are employees and generally have but slight
stock-ownership but they effectively run the corporation and at top
levels they are pretty much self-perpetuating. Management has become
an independent factor in production and often is the decisive ele-ment
in the economic success of the corporation.9
The record of management, like that of the large corporations, has
been one of great economic accomplishments. The United States has
by far the largest group of professional managers, both in numbers and