which seem to be of sufficiently wide applicability. A model that equips
the oligopolistic decision-maker not under heavy competitive pressure
with an objective of gross-revenue ("sales") maximization, subject to
the constraint of satisfactory net-revenue ("profit") [2, p. 49], succeeds
in explaining the lack of response to some cost-increasing events
observed in several instances. There are other simple models explaining
the same phenomenon, and one may think of good reasons for
finding one model or another more satisfactory. If the sales-maximization
hypothesis can explain a greater variety of observed responses or
nonresponses than other hypotheses can, and if it seems to correspond
better with self-interpretations offered by interviewed businessmen, it
merits acceptance, at least for the time being.

An alternative to the maximization of sales is the maximization of
the growth rate of sales [3, p. 1086]. This hypothesis is especially
interesting because it involves an endogenous relation with profits:
while some of the growth of gross revenue may encroach on profits, it
does so with an automatic limit in that profits are needed to finance the
investment required for the growth of sales.

Another extension of the objective function proposed on the basis of
behavioral research combines two managerial preferences for specific
expenses of the firm with the usual profit motive. The two additional
motives are expenditures for staff personnel and expenditures for managerial
emoluments; both figure prominently in the utility functions of
executives of companies which, sheltered from competitive pressures,
make enough profits to allow management to indulge in these personal
desires [48, pp. 38-60].

All these "managerial-discretion models" are simple and sufficiently
general to allow relatively wide application. We shall have more to say
about them later.

Effective Competition and Managerial Discretion

In mapping out the area of applicability for theories of managerial
discretion, we have spoken of "oligopoly," "monopoly," and of "firms
not under heavy competitive pressure." These are rather vague guideposts,
but unfortunately the literature has not been very helpful in ascertaining
precisely what it is that allows or restricts the exercise of
wide managerial discretion.

Some writers stress the size of the firm, suggesting that it is only in
the large firm that management can exercise discretion. Others stress
the condition of diffused ownership as the one that affords management
the opportunity of pursuing objectives other than maximization of
profits. Those who stress oligopoly as the domain for which objective
functions richer than profit maximization are needed are usually not
quite specific as to their criterion of an oligopoly position: it may be