most farm families can withstand a couple of bad years as well as, or
better than, city families can. It is rather the threat of several bad
years that really creates the emergency, especially for several hundred
thousand with critically heavy debt loads.

This kind of impasse was due before long anyway. The experience
of production under wartime and postwar incentives has only brought
it to a head sooner. No stronger inducement to expand production can
be conceived than to say to a farmer who has just marketed a big crop
at a guaranteed rigid price that we will pay you this same rigid price
for another big crop like this one. If a limit is put upon his acreage, he
simply steps up his yield per acre by choosing his best acres, using
more fertilizer, and by other measures that have become pretty well
known as a result of wartime efforts to increase output. The remarkable
increases in cotton yields in the last two years are only in part
due to favorable weather. Adding marketing to acreage quotas as- the
next step is only halfway effective in keeping down yields. And the
acreage taken out of cotton may go into corn; out of wheat, into
grain sorghum; etc. Livestock output in 1955 is 20 per cent above that
of 1947-49; crop output only 5 per cent.

The set of related actions needing to be taken to meet this emergency
situation in the next year or two is as follows:

1. Let prices for the basic products, and designated nonbasics, with
possibly a few exceptions, be determined in the marketplace, except
as these prices can be supported by government buying and distribution.
This distribution to be expanded importantly: (a) Through
schools-milk and other foods of livestock origin especially; (b) To
unemployed and low-income families generally-these same foods,
through some certificate or allotment plan; (c) For famine relief
abroad, and to finance development programs in backward countries;
and (d) For stockpiling in the case of any products in which stocks
are low.

2. Make compensatory payments to producers to make up the difference
between sales receipts and what the receipts would have been at
the modernized-parity flexible prices provided for in present legislation.
WVith products now on a quota basis, the compensatory payments can be
limited to these quotas. Compensatory payments should apply to the
products now under price supports and probably a few others.
3. Step up commercial exports. With market prices in the country
at the levels that will prevail under Numbers 1 and 2, our farm
products will be more exportable than now, and selling efforts combined
with this should be more effective than now.

4. Reduce present surplus stocks cautiously in such a way as not to
reduce domestic prices more than is highly necessary.