cerned are either content with their lot or despair of improving it,
so that incentives to progress are lacking. Conceivably this may be true
of the great majority of mankind, who subsist on very low levels under
the pressure of hopelessness. There is a vicious circle of gross poverty,
inefficiency, and stagnation if not retrogression. One of the most
ominous facts of today is that the greater part of the world's net increase
of population is taking place where such conditions prevail. Among such
peoples, a prerequisite to improving their consumption level and content
of living may be to get them first to raise their standards by stimulating
fresh wants and loosening the grip of custom and fatalism.
Marked disparity between standard and content of living, however,
often has serious consequences. The strains imposed by the severely
shrunken content of living in the Great Depression of the 1930's are
vivid in our recollections. It may well be that at its worst people were
generally better off, in various essentials, than in fairly prosperous times
fifty years earlier. Even so, the sharp contrast between what they had
and what they urgently wanted and felt they had reason to expect was
extremely hard to bear. In depression and in war, it is only by painful
readjustment of current standards that the conditions become endurable.

People differ greatly, of course, in their preferred patterns of living.
The French are noted for their consumption efficiency; on smaller
volumes of consumption, they can live better than many other peoples
can. By contrast, Americans are notoriously wasteful in their consumption
habits, and therefore require a far larger volume of consumption
to yield the same results in terms of living. Some individuals, groups,
and peoples set great store by security and leisure, while others prefer
to work harder and accept ups and downs if they can enjoy convenience,
variety, and a sense of opulence. Freedoms of various kinds are
much dearer to some groups than to others. Certain characteristics of
the standards of living of a people or group get crystallized into the
structure of their planes of living.
Large portions of mankind, now as in the past, rate status and stability
very high in their standard of living. For many individuals and
groups, however, not only change but what is considered progress is a
vital element in the standard itself. Mere achievement of a specific
plane of living is not enough. Their standard of living includes the
continued sense of achieving advances. In effect, their standard is typically
rising, and mere failure to advance spells deprivation if not frustration.

In the face of assumptions that standards of consumption and living
are more or less stable, the fact of changes in standards deserves renewed
emphasis.