Even for what they are assumed to represent, let alone as approximations
to shares in distributions by secular income levels, the data are
such that differences of two or three percentage points cannot be assigned
significance. One must judge by the general weight and consensus
of the evidence-which unfortunately is limited to a few countries.
It justifies a tentative impression of constancy in the relative distribution
of income before taxes, followed by some narrowing of relative
income inequality after the first world war-or earlier.
Three aspects of this finding should be stressed. First, the data are
for income before direct taxes and exclude contributions by government
(e.g., relief and free assistance). It is fair to argue that both the
proportion and progressivity of direct taxes and the proportion of total
income of individuals accounted for by government assistance to the
less privileged economic groups have grown during recent decades. This
is certainly true of the United States and the United Kingdom, but in
the case of Germany is subject to further examination. It follows that
the distribution of income after direct taxes and including free contributions
by government would show an even greater narrowing of inequality
in developed countries with size distributions of pretax, exgovernment-
benefits income similar to those for the United States and
the United Kingdom.
Second, such stability or reduction in the inequality of the percentage
shares was accompanied by significant rises in real income per capita.
The countries now classified as developed have enjoyed rising per
capita incomes except during catastrophic periods such as years of
active world conflict. Hence, if the shares of groups classified by their
annual income position can be viewed as approximations to shares of
groups classified by their secular income levels, a constant percentage
share of a given group means that its per capita real income is rising
at the same rate as the average for all units in the country; and a reduction
in inequality of the shares means that the per capita income
of the lower-income groups is rising at a more rapid rate than the per
capita income of the upper-income groups.
The third point can be put in the form of a question. Do the distribu-
(Oxford, 1951) p. 39; for 1929, Colin Clark, National Income and Outlay (London, 1937)
Table 47, p. 109; for 1880, 1910, and 1913, A. Bowley, The Change in the Distribution of
the National Income, 1880-1913 (Oxford, 1920).
Germany. For the constituent areas (Prussia, Saxony and others) for years before the
first world war, based on S. Prokopovich, National Income of Western European Countries
(published in Moscow in the 1920's). Some summary results are given in Prokopovich,
"The Distribution of National Income," Econ. Jour., March 1926, XXXVI, 69-82. See also,
"Das Deutsche Volkseinkommen vor und nach dem Kriege," Einzelschrift zur Stat. des
Deutschen Reicks, no. 24 (Berlin, 1932), and W. S. and E. S. Woytinsky, World Population
and Production (New York, 1953) Table 192, p. 709.