for broadly trained, cultured economists, rather than narrow specialists.
It is impossible for anyone to know beforehand the intricacies of all
domains of knowledge which impinge on a given problem. Prior training
can only equip the student with a realization that all aspects of a given
problem need to be studied before a worthwhile answer will emerge. In
the actual study of practical economic problems the researcher, and
still less the administrator and policymaker, cannot stop at the bounds
of what the theorist believes to be economics. He needs to become
acquainted with everything that has bearing on the problem being
studied, whether it be economics or anything else.
Aspects not deemed by most economists to be economics do have
importance for the solution of many economic problems. Man's motivation
in dealing with economic problems is not solely economic. The
economic man is a fiction, but the whole man a reality. To gain economic
ends, men resort to many practices which do not make sense from a
purely economic point of view. Beliefs actually held are scarcely less
important than what people ought to think.
Taking into account noneconomic aspects places a heavy responsibility
on the economist who studies questions of public policy. He has
to learn much that is new to him, including what often is an unfamiliar
language. But he generally can get help from specialists in other disciplines,
provided he appreciates the need for such help and knows from
whom to inquire. It is true also that practical problems seldom involve
all aspects of any academic discipline. To grasp noneconomic aspects no
great advance knowledge of other disciplines is required, only a desire
to understand the total setting and tireless study of the problem in its
entirety, no matter where it may lead.
I would add two other requisites for fruitful study of economic policy
questions. One is a genuine interest in the problem studied and zeal to
bring about improvement and correction of what is wrong. The other is
realization that institutions and conditions can be changed and that
progress and improvement are possible. Without real enthusiasm, no
study ever gets very far. Research which is merely part of the day's
work that has to be done lacks the fire needed to make it significant.
It is also my belief that for significant study of economic problems the
incentive afforded by possible economic gain will but seldom prove adequate,
as the returns are almost always small. Likewise, the motive of
merely accurately describing what exists is sufficient only for the exceptional
teacher, as also is that of trying to extol the existing institutions.
The most significant work on practical economic problems has
been done by people who have been inspired by a desire to change and
improve what exists.
A final admonition to the would-be researcher and the most impor-