unfavorable shift in the investment function is not offset within the
usual range of national income by the favorable effect of the redistribution
upon the savings function.
The problem which confronts the individual investor or the enterprise
is not the effect of general increases in wages on prices, but the effect
of the spread of union organization upon the probable return from a
particular investment. When one examines this matter, it is difficult
to avoid the conclusion that large and powerful unions tend to reduce
the marginal efficiency of capital. It is true that collective bargaining
frequently raises plant efficiency by giving management better information
about conditions and by giving representatives of the men an
opportunity to point out mistakes of management. Nevertheless, powerful
unions increase the likelihood that successful concerns will have to
share their prosperity with the employees. Until recently there has been
no offsetting protection against losses. The development of the policy of
union-management co6peration during the last twenty years has interesting
theoretical implications. Most of the cooperative plans have
been started in high-cost plants. They have been a way by which the
workers in these plants tried to safeguard their jobs. If union-management
co6peration were to become widespread in high-cost plants, it
would go far to offset reduction in the marginal efficiency of capital
produced by the encroachment of unions on the profits of the most
successful concerns. For the time being, however, one must conclude
that the spread of unionization tends to reduce the marginal return of
capital.
Are unions likely to reduce the return so seriously as to limit materially
the capacity of the economy to expand? That is a possibility, but
not a necessity, as the experience of the United Kingdom and Sweden
shows. One may assert with confidence, I think, that even a large and
powerful labor movement will be less harmful to expected returns on
investments than the shift in power that has been going on since 1933.25