Marxists have given up this theory for the developed countries. But it
has survived in the international sphere. Thus Paul Sweezy admits that
in the developed countries workers have a "tolerable if degraded life";
but the advanced countries "increasingly impose the burdens on the
people of the colonies and the raw-material-producing countries" [21,
p. 221]. A somewhat less extreme theory has been put forward by non-
Marxist writers. Thus Gunnar Myrdal holds that "trade operates (as
a rule) with a fundamental bias in favor of the richer and progres-
sive regions (and countries) and in disfavor of the less developed
countries." His thesis is not only that the poor countries derive less
benefits from trade than the rich, but that, in the absence of strong
protective policies, the poor become poorer if and because the rich get
richer."5
Baldly stated like that, these extreme views are not widely accepted,
but their influence in coloring the general thinking on these problems,
especially in the less developed countries, should not be underrated.
However, since they have been adequately criticized in the literature, I
shall not discuss them further [13] [2].
The moderate version of the pessimistic view concerning the interna-
tional position of the underdeveloped countries asserts that these
countries have had no, or only a very inadequate, share in the expan-
sion of world trade and that their international position has deterio-
rated continuously for the last ten years as evidenced by the lagging
volume of exports and unfavorable terms of trade.
Looking at the broad facts, we find indeed that while the volume of
exports and imports of the developed countries has grown at an annual
rate of about 7 per cent from 1950 to 1960, the volume of exports of
the "developing countries" (the official U.N. designation of less de-
veloped countries) has grown by 3.6 per cent and that of their imports
by 4.6 per cent during the same period.16 During the same period, the
terms of trade of the developing countries in the aggregate have de-
teriorated by about 9 per cent as a consequence of a rise of about 10
per cent in unit value of the imports of the developing countries and a
slight rise of unit value of their exports.17