total sales of all products is small. It is the decline at the same
time in purchases of nonfarm producer goods for new investment that
does the most damage, next the decline in home building and sales of
house furnishings, then in the sales of automobiles and consumer
durables, and then in travel and recreation.
More important than any loss of sales to farmers in such a situation
is, in Professor Alvin Hansen's judgment, the effect of the decline in
farm product prices on the general price level. In fact, Professor
Hansen goes so far as to say that the break in farm product prices as
surpluses developed in 1948 was the largest single factor in checking
the world-wide postwar inflation still going strong.6
What develops out of such thinking as the foregoing is the general
conception that breaks in farm prices do not cause business recessions,
and for similar reasons, upward surges in farm prices do not cause
business recoveries, but that farm price movements and related events
or developments within the farm economy may condition more or less
the depth and duration of a business recession and likewise the course
of recovery from it. At the same time, the effect that some development
in agriculture, such as a year of adverse weather, may have on the
course of a business cycle depends considerably on the character and
state of the particular cycle at the time. To illustrate, no, doubt it was
the termination of demand for military goods that started the recession
in 1918-19. But surpluses of export farm products in 1920 played a
large part in the severe break in farm and other prices that came in
1920. But Chart IV shows that business returns were very little
affected by the short break in farm and other prices in 1920. Again,
possibly the curbing of production controls by a Supreme Court decision
in 1936, or possibly nothing more than a reaction to this plus
better weather, stepped up agricultural output by 1937-38 to more
than 10 per cent above its 1935 level, with farm prices falling off even
more by 1938. The peak in industrial output was in 1937, with a break
of a fifth in the year following. It is clear that something other than
agriculture precipitated this recession, but agriculture's performance
and rewards in 1937-38 both contributed to and were affected by it.
It should also be evident that the decline in aggregate farm income in
the year 1955 is not yet having any depressing effect on business in
the aggregate.
The foregoing statements are, of course, all aggregates or averages
for the nation. Some parts of the country may be much more affected
by agricultural setbacks than this average, and others considerably
less. To take the extreme type of case, a small city in the midst of
'Business Cycles and NYational Income (New York, 1951), pp. 21ff, 71ff.