movie, and radio have brought, have figured heavily along with increased
volume and variety of consumption itself. The increasing prevalence
of nonessentials which yield satisfaction out of all proportion to
their cost-of which the radio-is an outstanding example-deserves
special emphasis.

The character of the content of living, like that of consumption,
depends upon its composition or structure, in particular upon the degree
of harmony or balance among its components. Within limits, one element
may be accepted in substitution for another: heavier consumption
may offset less desirable working conditions, consumption may be sacrificed
for added freedom, larger savings may offset consumption restrictions,
and so on. Beyond certain limits, however, further restrictions of
consumption, possessions, or freedoms is reckoned intolerable, no matter
how ample other elements in the complex may be.

Improvement in the content of living can often be brought about
more easily and more substantially by limited changes in its structure
than by increase in the consumption level as a whole. As in Liebig's law
of the minimum and its variants in science and economics, a favorable
change in some highly deficient component may so improve the whole
content that reductions in some others will cause no injury. Here is a
valuable hint toward the technique of improving the living planes of
depressed groups or peoples whose productive or earning power is low.
A well-balanced simple plane of living may be definitely superior to
an ill-balanced elaborate plane, just as a cheap, balanced diet is more
nutritious, and perhaps even more satisfying, than an expensive, illbalanced
one. A very low plane or poor content of living, however,
makes the individual or group weak and vulnerable. The Irish famine
of the 1840's was so devastating because the huge population largely
subsisted on the cheapest carbohydrate and had no reserves to fall
back on when blight ravaged the potato crop. Probably the worst
damage to conquered European peoples in this war has been suffered
by the Poles and the Greeks, whose plane of living had been low.
A high, balanced, ample plane or content of living, on the other hand,
is a source of strength to the individual, group, or nation. Among other
things, it permits substantial shrinkage in one or more components to
occur without serious damage. Typically, cuts are taken where they
hurt least, instead of at vital points. The amazing record of the United
States during the present war is heavily attributable to the realized
possibilities of drawing upon various reserves implicit in our ample and
expensive pre-war content of living. By utilizing our huge stock of
durable consumer goods, and foregoing most additions to and improvements
in them, we could divert our plants and engineering primarily to
war purposes. We could expand employment and lengthen the working