resorts to political redress. Peaceful participation between rational and
intimately informed representatives of the parties at interest is the
surest way to approach true economic equilibrium.

The second premise-an effective scheme of democratic representation-
brings us to the very heart of the concept of collective bargaining.
If our business system is really to achieve the maximum possible
simultaneous expression of the interests of the whole people, it must
have reliable means of learning what those interests are. It is a notable
fact that, in the present organization of business, the individual
capitalist has been largely disfranchised by corporate management,
the ordinary farmer's voice drowned out by the pronouncements of the
farm organization "leaders," and the individual worker to a great
extent subordinated to the will of the labor union official. The situation,
however, differs widely from one organization to another and there are
some indications of a real move toward more representative forms and
practices. Some large corporations are beginning to have stockholder
participation in annual meetings, but this reform moves more along the
lines of grudging concession to popular outcry than along lines of sincere
and spontaneous efforts to get an effective registering of stockholders'
views. The co6perative movement in agriculture has shown
some interesting and effective arrangements designed to leave control
of policy effectively in the hands of the membership without impairing
the operative efficiency of either local or central units. A good organizational
plan builds a two-way street over which expressions of the
varied interests of individual members and local groups travel to central
headquarters whilst knowledge of general market requirements, preferences,
and limitations are disseminated down through the system to the
individual participant.

Our third premise for successful collective bargaining is full disclosure
of pertinent information by all parties. If negotiated settlements
are to form a sound basis of business administration, all parties
must be prepared to furnish an adequate and honest factual picture of
the situation in which they stand. Bargains conceived in the tradition
of David Harum or the trickery of the Oriental bazaar are not bargains
in any sense tenable for modern industrial life. All parties are in fact
concerned to make arrangements that will provide for the future security
of their common business venture. Imagine groups of scientists
trying to solve a problem while giving one another incomplete or
phoney data; or groups of mechanics working together on the basis of
false measurements or incomplete specifications! If business refuses to
install a modern lighting system at the bargaining table no less than
at the work bench, government will have to step in to secure full
ascertainment and divulging of the actual state of economic fact about
all the parties as they enter the area of group dealings. Collective