we consider reasonable on the basis of empirical research, with wide
applicability and fruitfulness and with great simplicity. The compro-
mise among these goals that we accept is, admittedly, a somewhat
"subjective" standard of selection, but perfectly in line with the stan-
dard accepted in all scientific fields. Concessions to any one of these
desiderata must be at the expense of the others.
Let us list some of the alternative maximanda that have been sug-
gested and are available for our choice: Total quasi-rents over a short
period of time (But how short? This is good only for a freshman
course); total quasi-rents during the service-life of existing fixed assets
(But is a replaceable part of a machine a fixed asset? This works only
for a one-hoss shay); present value of all profits (after taxes) ex-
pected in the future, discounted at a "normal" or "competitive" rate;
internal rate of return to equity; equity of controlling stockholders;
present values of retained earnings; growth rate of equity; gross rate
of total assets; growth rate of gross revenue (sales); gross revenue
(sales), if net revenues (profits) are satisfactory (over what period of
time?); salaries, bonuses, and other accruals (including services in
kind) to management, over their entire lives; all accruals to manage-
ment plus expenditure for staff personnel, compatible with minimum
profits; all accruals to management, consistent with satisfactory
profits and gradually rising prices of corporate stock; and, of course,
the present values of the various combinations of flows mentioned.
Surely a much longer list could be prepared, but there is no use to
this. The point should be clear: profit maximization proper may mean
a variety of things-several entries apply to money profits-and in ad-
dition there are a few other maximanda of possible relevance. Inciden-
tally, if profits or accruals to stockholders are not explicitly included
in some of the entries, let no one believe that they are really out of the
picture. No management could try to maximize its own accruals in the
long run if it completely disregarded the interests of the stockholders.
Hence, all maximanda are subject to the constraint of some minimum
benefits to the owners of the business in the form of dividends, capital
gains, or both."3
Subjective Information and the Charge of Tautology
I have a few remaining tasks, and one of them is to lay a ghost, one
that has long played tricks on economists and led them astray. He has