a uniformity or a command and someone finds it and publishes it, one
of the first results is a general impulse to violate it. Man is a "contrary
critter"-in contrast with the conformism of physical nature. And on
the other hand, men love to make laws for their own sake, to conform
for a while, until tired of it, then break them and make new ones.
Much of the apparent uniformity of behavior is such ritual. And there
may be substantive reasons for non-conformity, or for temporary conformity
that ultimately causes disruption of the pattern. A familiar
example is boom and depression in various prices and in general prices
-the purchasing power of money. An accepted prediction of change
will cause the change predicted, for a time, then an inevitable reversal.
It is true that many generalizations can be made about men
and about all known societies. Professor Murdock has listed some
dozens of them. But they are of a general, abstract type. All men
have a language-but what language? and what will they say in it
or with it? And so with numerous institutions. Every society has a
technology which "works" up to a point, keeps people alive; but in
spite of the conformity of the physical world to uniform natural laws,
the fact tells us virtually nothing significant as to what to expect in
the way of concrete "economic" behavior, corresponding to the prediction
of planetary orbits, eclipses, etc., or the outcome of physical operations.
(But if a physical operation is experimental, problem-solving,
prediction of the result or the course of the operation itself is a selfcontradiction.
) All peoples and most individuals have some religion.
But the careful student, Professor Lowie, finds it impossible to, give
a general definition of the word, and the dictionary definitions, vague
as they are, do not cover actual usage. The simple fact is that we
commonly recognize and describe human behavior forms as expressions
of some feeling, intent, belief, not as bare acts. And our terms
often contain an inseparable value-judgment as well; there is no specific
intent, not to mention a specific act, of murder or theft.
* * *

All this about the abstract and interpretive character of economic
theory or principles has little to do with their significance. That is because
their main value is connected with policy determination, under
the fundamental ethical principle of freedom. Assuming that men have
a right to want and strive to get whatever they do want, and to have
the tastes and "higher" values they do have, as long as their conduct
does not infringe the equal rights of others, the business of the economics
of principles, of utility, productivity, and price, is to explain
that, and how, the organization through buying-and-selling enables
everyone to do whatever he tries to do (whether rational or not, as
judged by anyone else) many times more effectively than would be possible