quence; indeed, until academic tenure has come, you are best advised
not to write for Harpers or the Manchester Guardian (to say nothing
of the National Review or the New Republic) lest you be indicted for
superficiality.
Good writing itself can be suspect. (I interject that if good literary
style is indeed a sin, it is not a sin that is very widespread among our
economics brotherhood.) John Stuart Mill tells us in his remarkable
autobiography that his father, James Mill, thought poetry was over-
rated; but that since poetry was overrated, young John ought to try
his hand at it. I believe it was Yale's Tjalling Koopmans, himself a
creative economist blessed with clarity of style, who advanced the
austere argument that exceptionally fine writing is a biasing factor
which might bring to an argument more attention and credence than
it really deserved. There is something to this: but no one should be
taken in by the false corollary that the intrinsic worth of an argument
is enhanced by virtue of its being phrased obscurely. Having said this,
one must add grudgingly that, while obscurity may not add to the
intrinsic worth of an argument, it has often been a contributory in-
gredient to fame. How many Marxians have read Das Kapital-I
mean read it through? Bernard Shaw once claimed that he was the
only man in England, including H. A/I. Hyndman and contemporary
Marxian leaders, who had read the book. Shaw himself was observed
at the British Museum by Harcourt3 in the act of reading Marx (in
the French translation, of course); so at least part of Shaw's claim
may be true. But Shaw was sitting in the British Miuseum with a copy
of Capital stretched before him and beside it a copy of the score of
Lohengrin; one can guess on which he could have earned the higher
exam grade.
This brings me to mention one of our members who is far away to-
night toiling on a distant shore. I refer of course to J. Kenneth Gal-
braith and have in mind The Affluent Society. To compare this book
with The Theory of the Leisure Class would be in some of our common
rooms, to damn it; in some, to praise it. Gibbon tells us how he found
his Decline and Fall on every boudoir table soon after its publication.
When we economists think how often in recent years people have been
asking us, " What do you think of The Affluent Society?"-and how
embarrassing the question has been to so many of us busy beavers-
we can appreciate that this work stands as good a chance as any of be-
ing read and remembered twenty years from now.
Yet always members of a guild have their defenses against the man
who ventures away from home. "It was all in Keynes's 1930 Saturday