would not argue that the existence of countervailing power proves that
our economy is still essentially competitive on the old model. He seems
only to argue that it works as well as the competitive system did.
Suppose, however, that "countervailing power" were a reality and
that it was just as effective or even more effective from the standpoint
of producing national product as was the competitive system. Suppose
that it also resulted in a distribution of income which was even superior
fronm a moral point of view to that of the competitive system. This
would prove very little about the degree to which the economic theory
applicable to a competitive economy was also applicable to an economy
of countervailing power. This observation applies to all those arguments
which claim that the economy is essentially competitive since
everything comes out about the same as under competition or even
better !
II
It will by now have become apparent, I hope, that the program this
year has been designed primarily to try to get at this question of where
we stand with respect to the nature of our economic system and whether
or not it differs in essence from what it was say seventy-five or fifty or
twenty-five years ago. It is, of course, not easy to define what is meant
by differing "in essence." As economists, I think the test would be
whether or not the economic theory which we would construct for
analytical purposes to deal with the system as it existed at any of these
earlier time periods would be adequate now.
The participants in this program have tried to develop and apply
this test to our problem. Since the many facets of the problem have had
to be developed in the separate sessions, I shall try, as best I can, to
integrate our cooperative effort and to indicate some of the complex
conceptual interrelationships. I cannot, of course, set forth the answers
which the participants have found. Indeed, most of the participants
may disagree profoundly with my own conclusions. I can, however,
indicate the kinds of questions which we have raised.
The first session for our program was set up to deal with the broader
aspects of the question of how competitive the economy really is. We
wanted to see clearly the positions taken on whether competition has
or has not been fundamentally impaired as a regulator of the economy,
as the protector of the consumer, and as the arbitrator of the divergent
interests of buyers and sellers of productive resources as well.
Stigler has shrewdly pointed out that the competitive model of price
determination is not intended to describe actual and individual pricing
processes, but is intended only to be analytical and predictive. Perhaps
a great deal of criticism of the classical model has arisen from our