giver's salary. Total contributions are dispersed through intermediary
organizations to the ultimate beneficiaries. The giver need never know
where the gift goes, nor the beneficiary from whence it comes.
The selection of books at one time was regarded as a matter of
individual choice requiring, for some readers at least, the most dis-
criminating judgment. As an indicator of the man himself, Ben Jonson
ranked a man's choice of books with his choice of friends.5 The
organizational revolution has changed all this. Beginning with the
Book-of-the-Month Club in 1926 [32, p. 5], some eighty-nine com-
mercial book clubs [4, p. 101] have been organized which, in the
words of a commentator, "for yearly fees, not only relieve their sub-
scribers of the physical exertion incidental to purchasing books, but
even free them from the mental anguish of making selections" [16,
p. 233]. Between 1954 and 1956 sales of adult trade books increased
by only 4 per cent while sales of book-club books increased by 25 per
cent [4, p. 87]. The Business Leaders' Book Club, the Educator's
Book Club, the Farmers' Book Club, the Science Book Club, the
Sportsman's Book Club, and the others all undertake to provide their
members with books suitable to readers of a certain type; and for
those who can't recognize their own type but want to buy the right
book, membership can be had in Best-in-Books.
The contrast I have been illustrating between the role of the indi-
vidual in eighteenth-century society and his role in twentieth-century
society is sharply revealed by comparing Patrick Henry's and the
American Civil Liberties Union's conceptions of the nature of the
fight for civil liberties. In 1775 Patrick Henry uttered his immortal
words, "Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the
price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not
what course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give
me death." In the 1950's the American Civil Liberties Union has this
to say of its own work: "The American Civil Liberties Union is the
only permanent non-partisan organization defending the Bill of Rights
for all-without distinction or compromise" [3, back covers].
But to recount these well-known facts on the decline of individual-
ism is not to decry them. It is merely to indicate something of the
scope and impact of the organizational revolution.
III. Economnists and the Organizational Revolution
With the organizational revolution affecting virtually every phase
of American culture and most significantly the economic sector, it
would have been strange indeed had not the thinking of American