might still exist between the organized industries of the different
countries. God knows, however, that would be a very different kind of
competition from the sort which economists have had in mind when
they have used the term in the past."
His statement has relevancy to the general subject of competition
and monopoly and the degree and variants of these terms. Not many
would maintain that competition among the few is likely to be essentially
the same as competition among many or that the theoretical analysis
essential to understanding either will be the same. Indeed, it is likely
to be profoundly and basically different and the circumstance that one
may still quite logically use the term competition to apply to two such
differing economic mechanisms is at the root of a lot of our problems in
price theory. This point is well illustrated by the title of Fellner's book,
Competition Among the Few.
It was about this time that I began to realize that American industrialists
were no longer so unanimously claiming that laissez faire and
the whole free enterprise system had been destroyed by the Roosevelt
Administration, since they were so vigorously championing the virtues
of the existing free enterprise system a decade after the inauguration of
the New Deal. (Of course, none of us is consistent, and the same man
who points with pride to the glories of the vigorous American system of
laissez fatre and competition may the next day be mourning at its bier,
the while he listens to some Marc Antony seeking to stir up the populace
to take vengeance on the assassins of the system.)
A couple of years later, with the New Deal still unrepealed, it was
the "progressives" among those who influenced our economic policy in
occupied Germany who, perhaps with tongue in cheek, insisted that
cartels should be abolished and that a competitive economy should be
set up on the United States model! Many of this extreme wing of
opinion had been insisting that in the United States we had monopoly
capitalism to such an extent that the legislative program of the New
Deal had been necessary to alleviate the monopolistic evils of the capitalistic
system and if these measures failed, as they might well fail,
socialism would be the only remedy. Apparently competition and free
enterprise had somehow come to life again in the United States in left
wing opinion as in right wing opinion!
When the Economic Cooperation Administration came into existence
in 1948, it became official American policy to try to induce European
countries to dismantle cartels and to imitate as nearly as possible "the
free enterprise system" of the United States. The American industrialists
who participated in the ECA enthusiastically supported this
policy. In a sense perhaps it was consistent for them to do so. British
industrialists might argue wryly that there was not a single cartel in all