then. It is interesting to note that federal civilian expenditures as a
percentage of GNP have not increased since 1938 [5, p. 50]. After a
very rapid reduction in military expenditures following the war the
disturbed international situation has produced a level of federal outlays
that shows little tendency to decline. National defense expenditures
accounted for 85 per cent of federal purchases of goods and
services in 1961 and total federal expenditures amounted to over 19
per cent of GNP. This is to be compared with the 3 per cent figure in
1929. Big Government in the sense of a big sector of the economy is
a comparatively recent phenomenon in the United States and there is
evidence that we have not yet completely accommodated ourselves to
this fact.
If one wishes to push the analysis of government-business relations
farther back in time he would need to take account of the extraordinary
position acquired by business in the society after the Civil War.
It is probably not too much to say that its supremacy was contested
by no other elite. The Civil War in destroying the plantation aristocracy
had eliminated one potential rival. And, as Schumpeter has emphasized,
U.S. business developed in an environment in which it did
not have to contend with an aristocracy by birth from whose numbers
have come so many members of the ruling class in Western Europe.
As late as the 1920's Calvin Coolidge could say with conviction and
pride that "The business of America is business," and be understood
by his fellow citizens.
So far as labor organizations are concerned, the growth of trade
unions with government encouragement and assistance has, of course,
had a profound effect on labor-management relations not only in the
area of unionization but outside. Furthermore, I think it can safely
be said that unions are here to stay. Concerning the relation of American
unionism to stabilization and growth policy two observations seem
pertinent. It is clear by now that one cannot look to American labor
for anything in the way of social or political initiative. As one observer
puts it, "The labor movement in the United States has taken
pride in the fact that it is non-ideological. It has revelled in its breadand-
butter or pork chop personality [1, p. 124]." Higher wages, more
job security and, if substantial unemployment persists, a demand for a
shorter work week, pretty much define the area of union initiative.
Secondly, the development of U.S. unionism has been such as to make
the formulation or implementation of anything like a national wage
policy extraordinarily difficult. Power is more decentralized than in
almost any Western European labor movement and all informed students
agree that a nationally organized and nationally effective trade
union organization is a necessary, though not sufficient, condition to a