21 Sonme may question the relevance of a comparison with national income. In my opinion,
it is relevant with certain qualifications: A large and sudden change in the terms of trade
might cause serious transitional difficulties. Or, if a cotuntry by extreme protectionism has
reduced its imports to a bare minimum and has neglected its export industries, a decline in
the terms of trade may necessitate a further reduction of imports which have already been
stripped to essentials. In that case the impact on GNP would be out of proportion to the
money cost of the deterioration quoted in the text because the "marginal benefit" of imports
would be much higher than the marginal benefit of domestic production. If my income falls
by 5 per cent and I were forced to skimp on food rather than spread the shortfall over
the whole range of expenditures, the result would be disastrous. But I doubt whether any
country really finds itself in such a predicament, although extreme protectionism could conceivably
put it there.
' Charles Kindleberger has pointed out to me that a veritable revolution has taken place
in ocean transportation. Thus, while the world wholesale price index in dollars has about
doubled since before the war, oil tanker rates are just about where they were, and dry cargo
rates have gone up on a very rough average by 50 per cent. This great cheapening of transport
cost constitutes a powerful integrating force in the world economy and has bestowed
great benefits, especially on many less developed countries, by improving their f.o.b. terms
of trade.
The drastic reduction in transport cost, made possible by technological advances, applies
primarily to the very competitive international routes. Many countries rob themselves of
those very large benefits by highly protectionist shipping policies. This is especially true of
coastal shipping, including sometimes shipping between neighboring countries. For example,
freight rates between Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires are often as high as between Buenos
Aires and New York, because of nationalistic policies. See [8, p. 2971.
The jet aircraft promises to produce another revolutionary advance in transport technology.