during business contractions. Since then, the continued progress of
technology, the very factor which originally was mainly responsible for
the concentration in the cyclical industries, has served to arrest this
tendency. The upward trend of production in manufacturing and the
other highly cyclical industries has remained rapid in recent decades.
However, advances of technology have come so swiftly in these industries
as well as in agriculture that an increasing part of the nation's
labor could turn to the multitude of tasks in which the effectiveness of
human effort improves only slowly, where it improves at all. Thus the
employees of "service" industries constituted 24 per cent of the labor
force in 1919, but as much as 44 per cent in 1957. The proportion of
self-employed workers in business and the professions, which was 9.4
per cent in the earlier year, became 10.6 per cent in the later year.
True, these gains in types of employment that are relatively stable during
business cycles were largely canceled by the countervailing trend in
agriculture. Nevertheless, the proportion of employees attached to the
cyclically volatile industries has not risen since 1919. Or to express this
entire development in another way, the proportion of workers having
rather steady jobs, either because they work for themselves or because
they are employed in industries that are relatively free from the influence
of business cycles, kept declining from the beginning of our
industrial revolution until about 1920, and since then has moved
slightly but irregularly upward.
Thus, the changing structure of industry, which previously had exercised
a powerful destabilizing influence on employment and output,
particularly the former, has ceased to do so. The new stabilizing tendency
is as yet weak, but it is being gradually reinforced by the spread of
"'white-collar" occupations throughout the range of industry. For many
years now, the proportion of people who work as managers, engineers,
scientists, draftsmen, accountants, clerks, secretaries, salesmen, or in
kindred occupations has been increasing. The white-collar group, which
constituted only 28 per cent of the labor force outside of agriculture in
1900, rose to 38 per cent in 1940 and to 44 per cent in 1957. Workers
of this category are commonly said to hold a "position" rather than a
"job" and to be paid a "salary" rather than a "wage." Hence, they are
often sheltered by a professional code which frowns upon frequent
firing and hiring. Moreover, much of this type of employment is by its
nature of an overhead character and therefore less responsive to the
business cycle than are the jobs of machine operators, craftsmen, assembly-
line workers, truck drivers, laborers, and others in the "bluecollar"
category. For example, during the recession of 1957-58, the
number of "production workers" employed in manufacturing, who approximate
the blue-collar group, declined 12 per cent, while the employ-