the Paley Commission made its analysis, and measures are likely to
be taken in the next five years or so which may well establish a pattern
of more liberal trading in the country's export products, and this
pattern may carry over into the years following when prices of these
products at home are closer in line with world market prices. It would
therefore now seem that exports of farm products may well hold up to
their present level and even exceed them by a few per cents in the
twenty years to 1975.
With the foregoing outlook for demand for U.S. farm products,
how much of the net available 245 million more acres will be needed by
1975? Of the 478 million in cropland, only around 350 million has
actually been harvested in recent years. The rest has been in the pasture
years of a crop-pasture rotation, or in fallow or idle. The P.M.P.C.
conclusions were that very few if any more acres will be actually harvested
in any one year around 1975 than recently, that the needed increase
in farm output will come partly from increased crop yields,
partly from improving pastures so that they will carry more head of
livestock, and partly from more efficient use of feed by livestock; and
that the increased yields per acre of both crops and pasture will come
in large measure from converting 80 million acres now in relatively
poor open pasture into productive crop and pasture rotations with
adequate erosion control. The rotations will be longer and take the form
mostly of reseeding with improved grass and legume mixtures.
The P.M.P.C. report also projected that 10 to 15 million acres of
woodland will be cleared by 1975, th'is just about offsetting the expected
loss of cropland to urban and highway uses.
The reason that the needed increase bv 1975 in output of farm products
will come from making present acres more productive, rather than
by bringing more acres into cultivation, is simply that it is cheaper to
do it this way in most situations. This is true even though power equipment
is now being applied to the clearing, leveling and drainage of land.
But this will not be true indefinitely in the future unless our population
growth levels off at an unexpected rate after another decade or so.
It is true in the present because we have such a backlog of technology
not yet put to use. We put part of this to use to give us the increased
supplies needed by the United States and its allies to win the second
world war, and to help in the rehabilitation of allied countries after
the war. Now that these extraordinary needs have slackened we have
our surpluses. As part of the P.M.P.C. study, the scientists working in
different lines of agricultural production in the U.S. Department of Agriculture
were asked how much yields per acre, per hundredweight of
feed, and per animal unit would be increased in the United States if
technology now known, or almost known, were applied generally. The