despite vigorous efforts by some Congressmen in both parties to reduce
less essential or wasteful expenditure; and now, since Korea, it is
climbing back toward a level not much below that of the war period.
There is no real indication in this postwar experience that we are making
progress toward a truly contra-cyclical use of fiscal policy; though
perhaps, in view of the extraordinary circumstances of the cold war and
now rearmament, such an achievement was hardly to be expected.
One aspect of fiscal policy that I felt was underemphasized in the
discussions of the 'thirties was the dangers that may be inherent in
the growing size of the budget as distinct from its variability. Keynes,
for example, said in 1940: "It appears to be politically impossible for
a capitalistic democracy to organize expenditure on the scale necessary
to make the grand experiment which would prove my case . . . except
in war conditions."20 This point of view was widely prevalent among
American economists, who laid our failure to achieve full employment
in the 'thirties to the fact that the yearly deficits were only three or
four billion dollars instead of ten or fifteen billions. As the war drew
to a close, there was much misgiving among government economists, as
well as academic, that the reduction of expenditures from the wartime
level would recreate large-scale unemployment. Predictions to this
effect were freely made and postwar policies were based upon them,
reinforcing the inflationary tendencies that have since proved so intractable.
This whole experience in prediction-one of the most striking
failures in the history of economics -was clearly due to the
Keynesian bias in favor of large public expenditure. It was accompanied
by such a show of "scientific" technique, with much making of
mathematical models, projections, and regression lines (and much scoffing
at business men as "armchair economists") that the plain man,
though he might distrust the conclusions, could scarcely be blamed for
being bewildered and misled.
As I have indicated, the bias toward high public expenditure tends to
load the task of contra-cyclical variation onto the revenue side of the
budget. Instead of the diamond-shaped pattern of change which the
budget should have, with the two sides moving in opposite directions,
we tend to have a rising burden of taxation to counter the persistent
upward tendency of expenditures. Such a process, if long continued,
would be likely not only to undermine any true contra-cyclical budgetary
policy but to change the character of the economy. The sheer size