and the relative values of their products." In the accompanying footnote,
he adds: "This is in the Ricardian tradition. For Ricardo expressly
repudiated any interest in the amount of the national dividend,
as distinct from its distribution. In this he was assessing correctly the
character of his own theory." Keynes then quotes from Ricardo's letter
to Malthus: "Political Economy you think is an enquiry into the nature
and causes of wealth-I think it should be called an enquiry into the
laws which determine the division of the produce of industry amongst
the classes who concur in its formation. No law can be laid down respecting
the quantity, but a tolerably correct one can be laid down
respecting proportions. Every day I am more satisfied that the former
enquiry is vain and delusive, and the latter only the true object of the
science."'
In earlier papers, covering a span now of over twenty years, I have
criticized the Ricardian assumptions, with special reference to the theory
of international trade-the given amounts of resources already
known and in use, the constant costs-and the conclusions which so
readily follow as to inherent equilibrating tendencies, mutually beneficial
to the trading countries. In view of the origins of classical economics
as an intellectual response to an expanding world, a world expanding
on a revolutionary scale, I have never been able to understand
how our thinking could have come to such a pass, and why as a graduate
student my teachers should have sought to impress upon me that
this was the one part of classical economics which we could still accept
as adequate, undamaged by time and change. To my mind, it was
never realistic, even for its own times, and certainly not for ours.
But as the quotations from Keynes indicate, and as Allyn Young
showed in his brilliant British presidential address in 1928 on "Increasing
Returns and Economic Progress,"4 the limitations of the Ricardian
kind of theorizing applied not only to international trade but to the
whole field of economic inquiry. It had ceased to be a study of growth
and had become static equilibrium analysis.
IV
Now I must make a second confession. In embarking upon Keynes'
General Theory, I was again for a few pages mystified and misled. In
view of the passages quoted above, I thought it was going to be a book
about the causes of wealth, based not on the given resources, already
known and in use, but on the forces and incentives which increase
them, and provide the growing real income and increased voluntary