the detailed nature of the function of competition and of the
supplements to it that may be needed as varying from industry to industry
and market to market. Simply listing the forms that government
action has so far taken and that now command quite general approval
lends strong support to this latter, more painstaking institutionalist
view. Let me mention a few: forecasting crop production; prescribing
minimum quality standards for most meats and for fluid milk; establishing
grades and grade labeling for various commodities; a costly wire
service providing day-to-day market information; requiring elaborate
registration statements from the obligors of most large security issues;
granting patent rights; insuring home mortgages; flexible regulation of
margin requirements for security trading; requiring actuarial reserves
for life insurance companies; requiring open competitive bidding in
floating railroad securities. All these various forms of government action
are aimed at supplementing the regulatory effects of competition
so as to improve the operation of our economy.

In general such supplements mean that the government introduces
modifications in the conditions under which business managerial decisions
are made. The important point is that these modifications, if
they are properly devised, do not involve the substitution of government
decisions for the day-to-day decisions by the managements of individual
businesses. We already have a great number and variety of
supplements in this sense and as time goes on both the number and the
variety seem likely to increase. Indeed economists should make it their
business to discover and to propose new possible supplements.
Government can, by such modifications in the conditions under
which business decisions are made in a particular industry, exert a
powerful influence toward decisions that more closely conform to the
public interest. Theoretically at least, there is another possible kind of
government action toward an industry through which such an influence
could be exerted, another kind of action that would not involve substituting
government decisions for the detailed day-in-day-out managerial
decisions of business. This other possible form of action is planning the
constitution or structure of an industry. So far we have had no real
experience in this country with such planning. The closest approaches
are plans for the railroad industry that did not materialize. But perhaps
one should also mention federal policy in disposing of surplus war
plants after tlhe second world war, private plans that have received
judicial sanction in trust dissolutions and private plans to merge that
have been disapproved. However, we have not really tried industry
structure planlning. But surely there should be instances where it would
be possible to improve the functioning of competition through planned
changes in an industry's structure. I think we are likely one of these