troubles among industrial countries could easily become a serious roadblock
to freer trade, as is already the case to some extent in the United
States through the tying of loans, buy-American policies, and similar
protectionist devices. Paradoxically, attempts at regional integration in
various parts of the world constitute an imminent danger to world-wide
integration and further growth of multilateral trade.24
As to the balance of payments, I must confine myself to a few remarks.
The current American difficulties will somehow be resolved, but
will hardly remain the last case of serious disequilibrium among the
industrial countries. WVith the rate of growth slowing down and inflation
going on in some countries, with anti-inflationary and growth-promoting
measures being taken in different countries with different degrees
of vigor and success, it would be very surprising indeed if strains in
the international payments system did not develop from time to time
in different places.
The extreme reluctance to change any exchange rate and the stubborn
rejection of floating rates not only for reserve currencies, which
is understandable, but also for nonreserve currencies throw a very
heavy burden on internal price and wage adjustments. The successful
operation of the present system requires, if world-wide inflation
is to be avoided, a degree of financial and wage discipline which few
countries have so far been able to muster.25 But the problem is not insoluble
and, since the imposition of financial and wage discipline is, after
all, the most important advantage that can be claimed for the system
of stable exchange rates, we can only hope that sufficient discipline will
in fact be forthcoming to bring about the necessary adjustments
smoothly and speedily without causing severe restrictions of trade or
serious unemployment in the process.
I suppose I have to mention international liquidity. I can only say
that it does not strike me as a problem of major importance or difficulty.
The policy-makers have a great number of plans to choose from
-Bernstein, Posthuma, Roosa, Triffin, Zolotas, to mention only a few
luminaries. Even the more modest ones would banish the danger of a
general lack of liquidity, at least for many years. I wish, therefore, that
a large part of the professional ingenuity that is now being spent so
lavishly on that issue were diverted to the basic and much more difficult
problems of internal price and wage restraints and adjustments.