ratio of W/P was probably very close to .63 or the exact average
value of k.

I submit, therefore, that the degree of agreement between the values
of k and of W/P is most striking and that the results conform to what
normally would be expected to occur under competitive productivity
theory. Hence, this constitutes a still further reinforcement to the
productivity function itself.

It should, however, be frankly recognized that there is a further
problem of reconciling these results with the known facts of imperfect
competition, oligopoly and monopoly. Such conditions, as has been
abundantly developed in our meetings, do exist, and, in fact, characterize
a large sector of our economy. It is, therefore, puzzling to find
labor's share approximately equal to that which we would expect under
conditions of perfect competition. A further investigation of this subject
is much needed. In the meantime, I would merely suggest that
perhaps one answer to the paradox may be that the quasi-monopolies
and oligopolies may have shared with their workers the excess gains
which they have made at the expense of the consumers.
We can make a further test of the degree to which W/P approxik


mates k and by examining the results for the British Dominions
of Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. This is done in Table IX.
Taken in the large, the agreement in the cross-section studies for
Australia between the values of W/P and k are indeed striking. In each
and all of the five inter-industry studies for the Commonwealth, the
differences never exceeded one standard error of k. For the five years
as a whole, the average value of k and W/P were both .55. The average
k

value of was .56. It would scarcely be possible to have a closer
k? j

agreement than this.

In the case of the four studies for the Australian states, the differences
in the case of Victoria were not great, never exceeding two
standard errors of k and being slightly reduced if the comparisons are
k

made between W/P and .29 For the three years as a whole, the
k? j

differences are largely ironed out since the average values of k are .65
k

and of W/P .66. The average value of was .70.

k? j
