producers and back from producers to consumers, against an equally
constant flow of goods and services in the opposite direction. Any
obstruction to the flow of business income, business outgo, consumer
income, or consumer expenditure-all of which are phases of the same
circuit flow of money-is like a stoppage on the assembly line. It
causes a slow-down or a breakdown in the whole works.
Saving, investment, and expansion. In general, the obstruction which
causes periodic breakdown lies in the process of cumulative saving
and investment, in their effect on the flow of consumer purchasing
power. (Note that I say "cumulative." Repairs and replacements are
costs, paid out of gross business income, and not out of savings from
net income.) Here we have the most critical, and still unsolved, problem
of dynamic economy. The bottleneck which throws the whole system
out of gear is in the flow of money, either from producers to consumers
or the reverse. In either case it results from saving out of net
money income. In a word, the trouble is caused by that classic virtue,
thrift, although we usually reserve that word for the little man with
a small income.

The present is a poor time to argue against thrift-against cumulative
saving, investment, and expansion. We are in the anomalous
position, unique in our history, of a dangerous excess of consumer
monetary income over the supply of consumption goods. Our only
salvation from inflation is either more saving, voluntary or compulsory,
or more drastic taxation and price control than Congress, bedeviled
by pressure groups, sees fit to impose. But I am thinking not of the
next two years, or the next ten, but of a longer run of time, in the
belief, as I said at the beginning, that long-range forethought now may
save us many headaches later.

The commonly accepted theory is that saving (in the absence of
hoarding) cannot impair consumer demand, because saved money is
invested, and invested money is paid out for wages, whereupon it is
immediately spent for consumption goods. This theory is untenable.
Only about 60 per cent of invested money is paid out as wages. The
rest goes elsewhere. A very significant part of income derived from
invested savings is in its turn saved, cumulatively. Not all of it gets
back promptly to the flow of consumer purchasing power. It can be
shown that in a continuous series of cumulative re-savings and reinvestments,
some of the money never gets back.

Since the only use of cumulative saving and investment is to expand
production, the process of expansion in part defeats its own purpose,
which is to expand the market for consumption goods. At first thought
this does not make sense, since it is incontrovertible that, in the course
of its long history, capitalism has tremendously expanded saving,