holy water, would fix the age of retirement at or below 60 when one
still looks forward to 17-21 years of life. Such a policy would produce
an army of endowed, if not particularly happy, loafers. Even in the absence
of continuing inflation, decrease in the ratio of work life to retired
life by four-sevenths since 1900 entails an offsetting increase in
saving for retirement which has not usually been achieved. And even
then, as a rule, the retiree does not share appreciably in the fruits of
technical progress. Solution consists in part in the re-establishment of
flexible, discriminatory wages, periodic worker retraining, possible job
reassignment, portable retirement provisions, price stability, and an evolution
in work scheduling. The alternative could be a variant of
Townsendism.

The second problem-ridden structural change accompanying population
growth is not mere urbanization (which within 30 years, according
to K. Davis, will gather over half the world's population into
cities of above 100,000), but the concentration of so large a proportion
of the population in megalopolitan centers which appear to be uneconomic
devourers of time and capital as in the past they were devourers
of population. This concentration appears to be the product of an indeterminate
mechanism, made up in the part of random variables and
fostered by disparities between social costs and social benefits as well
as by neglect of adverse externalities associated with concentration. In
short, the urban growth pattern may be stochastically determined,
with chance working on the side of the largest centers and in keeping
with Zipf's generalized Paretian, or rank-size, "the-higher-the-fewer
rule." Here we may not have a causal mechanism operative, since, as
M. G. Kendall [21] notes, "chance can mimic choice," nor do we have
simple, unlagged cause-effect relationships [22]. There could, of
course, be something like G. Myrdal's cumulative causation at work,
or perhaps a cuimulative process somewhat analogous to that described
by WV. J. Baumol in his "theory of cumulative deterioration" [2].
What is of immediate concern, however, is whether the mechanism
at work produces an optimum distribution of activities in space and of
population among cities. The outcome, whether good or bad, is almost
irreversible, underpinned as it is by fixed capital, special interests, inertia,
subsidies, and so on. That the outcome is optimal is to be doubted
despite the clamor of hyperurbanists. They forget that vulnerability
to attack by missile and from the air is positively associated with population
concentration. It is essential that one take into account all
costs as well as all benefits associated with large-city expansion, so remindful
of the growth of polyp colonies; only then is the marginal net
effect ascertainable. Excessive concentration of population in large
cities not only tends to dissipate gemeinschaftlicke ties, and generate