on the general economy than movements in either labor or business
earnings. Another group are political scientists who hold that the independent
family farm is a nation's bulwark of democracy, a position restated
recently by A. Whitney Griswold in his Farming and Democracy
(1948). It may be remembered that Thomas Jefferson went
farther and said that farmers "are the chosen people of God-whose
breasts He made his peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine
virtue" (quoted from Griswold). The political circumstance which is
of most significance in this country is that the thinly populated dominantly
agricultural states like Vermont and Nevada have as many
votes in the Senate as New York and California.

The political aspects of our subject, however, are reserved for the
end. The central welfare question on the economic side is how agriculture
fares in the distribution of the nation's income. How early in the
nation's history political agitation in these terms began, and the course
it has followed, would be tedious to trace. Suffice here to say that it
was already pretty fully blossomed in the Equity Movement in the
very first years of this century. If your library has a book called The
Third Power by J. A. Everett, you will find clearly stated in it the
doctrine that the farmers are feeding the rest of us at an unfairly low
price, and that the only recourse for them is to organize themselves
into a "Third Power" and battle with Labor and with Business. The
first Secretary of Agriculture Wallace and his economists resumed
this line of talk in the price break of 1920-21. His chief economist
Henry Taylor called it the "new agricultural economics" whose object
was to obtain for the farmers their "fair share of the national income."
The measures presented to Congress in the 1920's had this objective.
This particularly describes the two McNary-Haugen Bills passed by
Congress and vetoed by President Coolidge. The name in those years
for the fair prices that would give farmers their fair share was "fair
exchange value." The Agricultural Marketing Act of 1929 ostensibly
had the same objective, but it provided very different procedures for
attaining it, procedures which came sadly to grief from 1929 to 1932.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 translated "fair exchange
value" into "parity." It too had a fair share for the farmer as its
objective, but this was to be obtained more gradually and mostly as
a result of production adjustments.

Farm prices improved rapidly from 1933 to 1937, and then broke
again with the minor business recession of 1938. The measures adopted
in these years, particularly in 1933-36, were conceived, or at least
evolved largely, within the executive departments of government. From
1938 on, the farm bloc in Congress took over the writing of the agricultural
reform legislation, and shifted it to a price support basis. By