Agricultural Adjustment Act, was transformed more and more into
a price-support program from 1938 on.

Many thousands of persons still living heard President Ed O'Neal
of the American Farm Bureau Federation tell on one occasion or
another how he once said to Sam Gompers, the great pioneer labor
leader of this country, "Sam, you have had great success in organizing
labor to work for its own interests. I am starting out to help farmers
as you have helped labor. Haven't you some good advice to give me?"
"I surely have," said Sam. "The American Federation of Labor is
interested in much more than wages for its members. But it does not
stress these other things. We pick out one thing, simple, that everybody
can understand, wages, and fight hard to raise them. You must
(1o the same." O'Neal then asked: "I suppose then that you would say
that higlher prices for the farmer is what the Farm Bureau should fight;
for." "I surely would," said Sam. And that is what the Farm Bureau
dlid in those years.

All of the efforts of the economists in the Administration and outside
in the 1930's to get parity put on an income rather than a price basis
therefore largely failed. The Act of 1936 did set up parity income as a
basis for prorating the supplementary income payments, but these
ended with the War, and the parity of income standard with them. As
has been stated earlier, the same price for a big acreage as an average
one, or for a high yield as for an average one, is the most effective
dev-ice that one can think of to induce farmers to go out and produce
anotler bi, crop, if not by planting more acres, then by using more
fertilizer and the like, so as to make another big killing. Yet rarely in
debates in Congress on price supports is this pointed out, or even by
agricultural economi-sts for that matter. The procedure of adjusting
prices downward for crops above average, so as to support no larger
returns from a big crop than for an average one, has got labeled "flexible
prices" and is being viciously maligned as sliding only in one direction,
downward.

In the immediate political situation, the focus of attention is again
on prices, indeed, on prices more largely than ever before. Sam
Gompers said, "Pick out some one thing, simple, that everybody can
understand, and fight for it." The party in opposition to the one in
the Xhite House is not now usually asking for full parity prices, but
for 90 per cent of them, rigidly, witlh no adjustment for size of the
cro..

The new element in the situation is that this party is also the party
generally believed to be favored by the labor organizations. Who would
have thotught ten years ago that in 1956 he would see the Southern
Demiocrats who want higher prices for cotton and tobacco voting
together with the northern organized labor politicians?