come largely from superficial observation of the material circumstances
that surround us. Instead they should be hypotheses to be tested.
There are other questions that are particularly appropriate for exploration
by economists who study contemporary institutions. What is
happening to the mobility of the factors of production as labor and capital
become controlled by ever larger organizational units? What effect
are corporate-financed social security programs and union rules governing
seniority and other conditions of employment having on the
mobility of labor? What effect is the corporation's interest in developing
the well-rounded, loyal organization man, in preference to the nonconformist
of distinction, having on the supply and mobility of managerial
talent? What can we learn about prices from the recent tendency
of corporations to finance expansion out of earnings without direct recourse
to financial markets? What are the factors that explain the apparent
anomaly of rising prices and declining production? Do the price
and investment policies of big business on balance inhibit rather than
promote the growth of output and investment? Do they result in a distribution
of income incompatible with the fullest utilization of existing
productive facilities? Finally, and most important, to what extent can
the structure of industry be modified and the economy made more flexible
without loss of efficiency? Can this be done through tax measures?
Can it be done through more selective and vigorous administration of
the antitrust laws? These are some of the questions with which students
of industrial structure might well be concerned. They are becoming
increasingly important to a free-enterprise economy in a world of
competitive co-existence.
Oliver Wendell Holmes once remarked, "Every now and then a
man's mind is stretched by a new idea . . . and never shrinks back to its
former dimensions" [15, p. 266]. It is to be hoped that the minds of
contemporary students of economic institutions that have now encompassed
the corporate system may be sufficiently flexible to engender an
inquiring attitude about what it means and where it is leading us.
REFERENCES
1. M. A. ADELMAN, "The Measurement of Industrial Concentration," Rev.
Econ. Stat., Nov. 1951, 23, 269-96.
2. , "A Current Appraisal of Concentration Statistics" (summary of
paper delivered at the 117th annual meeting of the American Statistical
Association, Sept. 10-13, 1957), Jour. Am. Stat. Assoc., June 1958, 53,
568.
3. American Civil Liberties Union, Inc., Annual Reports, 1953-57.
4. American Library Annual for 1957-1958. New York 1958.
5. Atlantic Monthly, Feb. 1956.
6. Atlantic Monthly, April 1956.