24
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
as just another idea. The freedom of thought which is so dearly loved in Amer-
ica can become freedom from thought. Politics and the arts are looked upon as
subjects which may be interesting to some people and not to others. Sym-
phonies and operas are produced for those who happen to be interested and
are not thought of as expressing the culture of the country.
If the student who would learn to know America should try to educate
himself through books he will find that his attention is dispersed rather than
concentrated on some central trends. The student will not find books which
will tell him what kind of a country America is and how new inventions affect
the American ideal. Americans seem to be convinced that America is so large
and complicated that no generalization can hold true for it. Americans feel
that they are free of traditions and they feel that their culture is broader in
scope than that of any other country which has ever existed. The booksellers
and makers of books reflect this feeling clearly. Books in America tend to
spread one's interests wider and wider. They do not comment on or add to a
central theme which runs through American life. The attitude to be found in
books on all sorts of subjects is that each book is a contribution in some small
field which will interest specialists, but no book in America would claim to
be of general interest and no writer would try to relate his book to the Ameri-
can culture as a whole. Freedom to the American means refraining from trying
to discover any of the enduring characteristics of American culture. The
American doesn't want to feel that he is committed to anything. Therefore his
attention must always be shallow. The American student almost never finds
his way out of this welter of superficiality by reading books. My father was
very seriously annoyed about this. It made him feel angry and frustrated to
hear the purveyors of education and information insisting on the importance
of freedom of the press and of communication while using this same freedom
to channel minds into the thin layer of contemporary froth which is the sub-
ject of study in American books and schools. My father felt that it would be
very difficult for Americans to realize the nature of their predicament. He
did not see any method of escaping from a trap in which the media of com-
munication are the stronghold of a dogma.
Perhaps the lack of interest in gathering useful information from the past
can be illustrated by referring to the rôle of newspapers in our society. My
father often remarked that newspapers and superficiality are synonomous.
Newspapers must always produce something new and interesting and they
must never seem to be interested in anything that is old. Newspapers cannot
be concerned with origins nor with the foundations of society, so that the effect
of newspapers on society must be to disperse attempts at profound thinking
and attempts at building up a body of tradition. My father used to say that
newspapers have to keep stirring up the animals. For a potential reader to be
satisfied with the contemplation of a traditional body of culture is a very
unsatisfactory state of affairs for a newspaper. Newspapers are concerned
with the immediate present and the immediate future and their success reflects
similar interests in a large part of the population.
Radio programs reflect these tendencies and reinforce them even more.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
