sumption function in the United Kingdom between the pre-World War
and the post-World War decades, as indicated by Colin Clark's esti-
mates, did not prevent the persistence of a large amount of unemploy-
ment throughout the twenties. 16 Too much attention has been paid by
recent economic theory to mere changes in the amount of thriftiness and
too little to changes in the kind of thriftiness and to shifts in the pro-
pensity to invest. 17
VII
The effect of the drop in the rate of population growth upon invest-
ment opportunity might seem to depend in the main upon how rapidly
the marginal return on capital falls as capital per worker increases.
Except for the investigations of Douglas, little work has been done on
this point. The problem, of course, is not how marginal efficiency of
investment behaves under static conditions but how it behaves under
the rate and kind of technological change and the price movements that
may be expected to occur. It is highly probable (though not inevitable)
that technological change will increase the amount of capital that each
worker can advantageously manage because inventions consist largely
of making apparatus more automatic and adding automatic attach-
ments. Douglas estimates that an increase of 270 per cent in fixed capi-
tal per worker in manufacturing between 1899 and 1922 was accom-
panied by a drop of 44 per cent in the marginal physical productivity
of capital. This is not a rapid drop and it occurred when technological
research was on a far smaller scale than it is now. It is interesting to
observe that the drop in the marginal physical productivity of capital
was accompanied by a large rise in interest rates. 19 This contrast be-
tween the movement of interest rates and the marginal physical pro-
ductivity of capital suggests in how great measure the marginal return
18
sufficient to provide plant and equipment necessary to enable the increment of workers to
earn the prevailing scale of wages.
16 Colin Clark, National Income and Outlay, p. 185.
"Liquidity preference appears to be sensitive to changes in investment opportunity. An
improvement in the marginal efficiency of capital not only produces more investment under
a given state of liquidity preference but also actually changes the state of liquidity pre-
ference; that is, produces a shift in the schedule of liquidity preference. Likewise, a drop in
the marginal efficiency of capital produces a rise in liquidity preference. Furthermore, a
rise in liquidity preference produces a drop in the marginal efficiency of capital and hence
a further rise in liquidity preference. Because the marginal efficiency of capital and the
schedule of liquidity preference are not independent variables, a change in either one of them
is more important in determining the capacity of the economy to expand than changes
in the consumption function.
18 P. H. Douglas, The Theory of Wages, pp. 121, 125, 130, and 146.
19
'Macaulay's index of the adjusted yield of railroad bonds rose from 3.182 in 1900 to
5.168 in 1920. F. R. Macaulay, The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and Stock
Prices in the United States Since 1856, pp. A 152, A 157.