2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
mild setback. Since 1937 we have had five recessions, the longest of
which lasted only 13 months. There is no parallel for such a sequence
of mild or such a sequence of brief-contractions, at least during the
past hundred years in our own country.
Nor is this all. The character of the business cycle itself appears to
have changed, apart from the intensity of its over-all movement. We
usually think of the business cycle as a sustained advance of produc-
tion, employment, incomes, consumption, and prices, followed by a sus-
tained contraction, which in time gives way to a renewed advance of
aggregate activity beyond the highest levels previously reached. We
realize that changes in the price level occasionally outrun changes in
production, that employment is apt to fluctuate less than production,
and that consumption will fluctuate still less; but we nevertheless think
of their movements as being roughly parallel. This concept of the busi-
ness cycle has always been something of a simplification. For example,
during the early decades of the nineteenth century, when agriculture
dominated our national economy, occasional declines in the physical
volume of production, whether large or small, had little effect on the
number of jobs and sometimes had slight influence even on the flow of
money incomes. As agriculture diminished in importance, the nation's
production, employment, personal income, consumption, and price level.
fell more closely into step with one another and thus justified our think-
ing of them as moving in a rough parallelism. In recent years, however,
and especially since the second world war, the relations among these
movements have become much looser.
The structure of an economy inevitably leaves its stamp on the char-
acter of its fluctuations. In our generation the structure of the American
economy has changed profoundly, partly as a result of deliberate eco-
nomic policies, partly as a result of unplanned developments. In consid-
ering problems of the future, we can proceed more surely by recogniz-
ing the changes in economic organization which already appear to have
done much to blunt the impact of business cycles.
I
In the early decades of the nineteenth century the typical American
worker operated his own farm or found scope for his energy on the
family farm. Governmental activities were very limited. What there
was of industry and commerce was largely conducted through small
firms run by capitalist-employers. Corporations were rare and virtually
confined to banking and transportation. As the population grew and
capital became more abundant, individual enterprise expanded vigor-
ously but corporate enterprise expanded still more. An increasing part
of the nation's business therefore came under the rule of corporations.
