share of the 1st quintile drops to 3.8 (line 18, col. 7). Under the same
conditions, the share of the 5th quintile changes from 37.7 (line 9, col.
1) to 40.9 (line 19, col. 7).

Fifth, even if the differential in per capita income between the two
sectors remains constant and the intrasector distributions are identical
for the two sectors, the mere shift in the proportions of numbers produces
slight but significant changes in the distribution for the country
as a whole. In general, as the proportion of A drifts from 0.8 downwards,
the range tends first to widen and then to diminish. When the per
capita income differential is low (2 to 1), the widening of the range
reaches a peak close to middle of the series, i.e., at a proportion of A
equal to 0.6 (lines 4 and 7); and the movements in the range tend to be
rather limited. When the per capita income differential is large (4 to 1),
the range contracts as soon as the proportion of A passes the level of
0.7, and the decline in the range is quite substantial (lines 14 and 17).
Sixth, of particular bearing upon the shares of upper-income groups
is the finding that the share of the top quintile declines as the proportion
of A falls below a certain, rather high fraction of total numbers.
There is not a single case in the illustration in which the share of the
5th quintile fails to decline, either throughout or through a substantial
segment of the sequence in the downward movement of the proportion
of A from 0.8 to 0.2. In lines 6 and 9, the share of the 5th quintile declines
beyond the point at which the proportion of A is 0.6; and in all
other relevant lines the downward trend in the share of the 5th quintile
sets in earlier. The reason lies, of course, in the fact that with increasing
industrialization, the growing weight of the nonagricultural sector,
with its higher per capita income, raises the per capita income for the
whole economy; and yet per capita income within each sector and the
intrasector distributions are kept constant. Under such conditions, the
upper shares would fail to decline only if there were either a greater
rise in per capita income of sector B than in that of sector A; or increasing
inequality in the intrasector distribution of sector B.
Several other conjectural conclusions could be drawn with additional
variations in assumptions, and multiplication of sectors beyond the
two distinguished in the numerical illustration. But even in the simple
model illustrated the variety of possible patterns is impressive; and
one is forced to the view that much more empirical information is
needed to permit a proper choice of specific assumptions and constants.
Granted that several of the conclusions could be generalized in formal
mathematical terms, useful inferences would be within our reach only if
we knew more about the specific sector distributions and the levels and
trends in per capita income differentials among the sectors.
If then we limit ourselves to what is known or can be plausibly assumed,