Government is the purchaser of a large part of the products of private
industry and the supplier of many services vital to the economy. As
Solomon Fabricant in his studies for the National Bureau has estab-
lished, almost 10 per cent of all products of industry in recent years
have been purchased by government, and a much higher percentage
during the second world war.5
This is the age of the service state, in which government supplies
many important services for the mass enjoyment of the people. Of
these, defense is by far the most important. Education, highways,
public welfare, and social security are very large service activities, as
well as many others. Government as a producer is to some extent a
competitor, but much more it is a stimulant to private business, The
automobile, to cite but a single illustration, is credited with being in-
directly the source of something like one-fifth of all employment today.
But how large would be the automobile and related industries without
the great public expenditures for the improved highways and the
rapidly expanding outlays for parking facilities? A long list of businesses
experiencing competition from government has been publicized by the
Hoover Commission, but by far the most numerous instances it lists
are those of government production of goods and services for its own use,
not products produced for sale in the markets. Government as a pur-
chaser, producer, and competitor is a field thus far left almost entirely
by economists to politicians and propagandists, but which clearly
merits much more attention from the point of view of its economic
effects.
Government regulation of business has been less neglected and there
is little need for stressing the importance of this aspect of political
economy. Some regulation has existed from earliest times, but like every-
thing else, regulation has changed with changing conditions. We no
longer regulate chimney sweeps as Congress provided for in 1819, but
we now regulate the beauticians and the barbers, the electricians and
the plumbers, and, in some respects, all businesses.
More than in any other aspect of the government's role in the
economy, economists long have been interested in its function as the
preserver of competition. To the classical economists, competition was
an all-sufficient regulator, once governmental encouragement of
monopoly was ended. That view is not completely dead, but our anti-
trust and fair-trade-practices laws more and more have become regu-
latory legislation. While there are some doubts, particularly among
business economists, about the wisdom of the underlying policies, it
seems certain that competition and monopoly and government's re-
5 Solomon Fabricant, The Trend of Government Activity in the United States Since 1910 (New


#### Split:
York, 1956).