ments, the rise of the stock of education in the labor force, returns to
education, and the contribution that the increase in the stock of educa-
tion may have made to earnings and to national income.
It is not difficult to estimate the conventional costs of education con-
sisting of the costs of the services of teachers, librarians, administrators,
of maintaining and operating the educational plant, and interest on the
capital embodied in the educational plant. It is far more difficult to esti-
mate another component of total cost, the income foregone by students.
Yet this component should be included and it is far from negligible. In
the United States, for example, well over half of the costs of higher edu-
cation consists of income foregone by students. As early as 1900, this
income foregone accounted for about one-fourth of the total costs of
elementary, secondary and higher education. By 1956, it represented
over two-fifths of all costs. The rising significance of foregone income
has been a major factor in the marked upward trend in the total real
costs of education which, measured in current prices, increased from
$400 million in 1900 to $28.7 billion in 1956 [18]. The percentage rise in
educational costs was about three and a half times as large as in con-
sumer income, which would imply a high income elasticity of the demand
for education, if education were regarded as pure consumption."¹ Educa-
tional costs also rose about three and a half times as rapidly as did the
gross formation of physical capital in dollars. If we were to treat educa-
tion as pure investment this result would suggest that the returns to
education were relatively more attractive than those to nonhuman
capital.¹²
Much schooling is acquired by persons who are not treated as in-
come earners in most economic analysis, particularly, of course,
women. To analyze the effect of growth in schooling on earnings, it is
therefore necessary to distinguish between the stock of education in
the population and the amount in the labor force. Years of school com-
pleted are far from satisfactory as a measure because of the marked
increases that have taken place in the number of days of school attend-
ance of enrolled students and because much more of the education of
workers consists of high school and higher education than formerly.
My preliminary estimates suggest that the stock of education in the
labor force rose about eight and a half times between 1900 and 1956,
whereas the stock of reproducible capital rose four and a half times,
both in 1956 prices. These estimates are, of course, subject to many
"Had other things stayed constant this suggests an income elasticity of 3.5. Among the
things that did change, the prices of educational services rose relative to other consumer
prices, perhaps offset in part by improvements in the quality of educational services.
12 This of course assumes among other things that the relationship between gross and
net have not changed or have changed in the same proportion. Estimates are from my
essay, “Education and Economic Growth" [19].