later became a formidable obstacle for world-wide integration, had not
yet made much headway.

The first serious disintegration of the world economy, foreshadowed
by the rising protectionism and economic nationalism from 1880 on,
became a fact during and immediately after the World War of 1914-18.
After a brief interlude of freer trade in the 1920's, real disintegration
and rapid decline of world trade set in with the Great Depression. After
an incomplete and hesitant recovery, disintegration reached its nadir in
World War II.

The third wave of world-wide integration and growth started soon
after the end of World War II, gathered momentum after 1948, and
is still in progress. It has been centered on and propelled by the
spectacular recovery and rapid growth of all industrial countries, including
the United States and United Kingdom, notwithstanding their
recent troubles and their lower growth rates compared with the Continent
of Europe and Japan. Contrary to what is often said, the prosperity
of the "industrial centers" of the world economy did spread, though not
as rapidly and fully as one would wish, to the “periphery" of the less
developed countries, to use Raul Prebisch's picturesque designation of
the two areas. This wave of world-wide integration has had more
powerful and beneficial effects than the much more advertised and
talked-about series of regional integrations.

II. National Economic Integration

Let me now add some observations on each of these phases of the
growing world economy. Later I shall analyze recent developments
in somewhat greater detail in the light of the historical perspective
gained.

The internal integration of the British and French economies was
vigorously pursued during the mercantilistic era. The economy of Great
Britain emerged as a fully integrated unit in the eighteenth century and
the economic integration of France was completed when the French
Revolution swept away all still existing internal barriers to trade and
migration. In both countries, as well as in almost all others, political
and administrative unification and centralization preceded and promoted
economic integration. Early attempts at close Anglo-French
economic co-operation, sponsored by the physiocratic advisers of Louis
XVI and by Adam Smith's influence on the younger Pitt, culminated in
the Eden Treaty of 1786 which brought drastic tariff reductions. But
the movement toward freer trade was premature and was soon interrupted
by the French Revolution and the following wars. Not before
1860 was the time ripe to accomplish what had been tried 75 years
earlier.
