economy as a whole as well as speculate about the individual firm,
particularly since a knowledge of the former throws a great deal of
light upon the problems of the latter?

In the meantime, however, we should all welcome such brilliant
studies of the production function for individual firms as that which
will shortly be published by my friend and colleague, Professor William
H. Nicholls, for a meat-packing plant. 22a Moreover, if we could get the
figures for specific firms and plants within given industries for a specific
year, we would then be able to develop production functions for each
of the main industries with each firm serving as an observation. But
the census has always been obligated to conceal the identity of the
specific firms which report to it and can only publish totals by industries
and geographical subdivisions. This fact prevents us, at
present, from developing such studies, although it is barely possible
that either the Census Bureau itself or employers' associations could
carry them on, were they once convinced of their value. This cannot,
however, be done at present.

To my mind, therefore, we are at present forced to work primarily
with industry aggregates. But there is one important refinement which
we can and should introduce. That is to divide the total number of
workers, the aggregate amounts of capital, and the total net value of the
product in each of the various industries by the number of plants in
that industry. This will give us plant averages for given industries
rather than industry aggregates as the individual observations 23 and
from these we can derive another variant of the production function.
We have made such studies for each of the six years which were
covered for American manufacturing and for two of the Australian
studies and these results are embodied in Table IV.
It will thus be seen that while we obtained closely similar results in
Australia by the two methods, nevertheless, clear differences developed
in the case of the United States. In every year the value of k in our
American studies was substantially less under the method of plant
averages than it was under the method of industry aggregates. The
amount of this difference ranged between 5 and 6 points, as in 1904 and
1909, to 15 points in 1889. On the other hand, the values of j were
always higher under the methods of plant averages than under that of
industry aggregates but the amounts of these differences were much less.
As a result, the combined values of k + jare less by from 3 to 8 points




#### Split:

22 William H. Nicholls, Labor Productivity Functions in Meat Packing, to be published
by University of Chicago Press, 1948.

23 This is not quite the same as the so-called "representative" firm because many firms
operate multiple plants.
