14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
Indeed, one is seldom given any inkling as to what constitutes the essence
of bureaucracy, or where the line may be drawn between legitimate and
bureaucratic governmental activity. For the most part the charge of
bureaucracy but epitomizes over-all recalcitrance to control, lumping
in a single blast of condemnation the great variety of considerations,
largely substantive in character, which usually impel attacks upon
government intervention in the economic sphere. Much of the distrust
is based, of course, upon justifiable complaint against inefficient
administration resulting from poor choice of personnel and lack of
discipline, against slowness of action arising from cumbersome and
hierarchical assignments of responsibility, against self-perpetuating and
self-aggrandizing activities of public appointees. As already noted,
removal or mitigation of such governmental and political defects is, and
should be, a matter of deep concern. But aside from these general
strictures upon government and politics, and to the extent that regula-
tory processes rather than the policies to be enforced are at issue, it
must be assumed that the critical emphasis upon bureaucracy springs
from the fact that our prevailing governmental establishment operates
predominantly in economic matters through boards, bureaus, and
commissions. From this standpoint it is the administrative method of
control, as reflected in the nature of the major regulatory agencies,
which is assumed to threaten our liberties.
Administrative tribunals have come into being and have expanded
with the years because they provide "working implements of govern-
ment," to use a phrase of Chief Justice Stone, which are indispensable
to the successful attainment of regulatory ends. Exclusive reliance upon
the courts would but give effect to customary common-law rules,
constituting a virtual abdication of positive policy making in face of
urgent need of control in many directions; and even within these narrow
limits such judicial activity would result in the mere provision of private
redress for past infringements upon prevailing obligations, rather than
in the affirmative establishment of such relationships as are deemed to
be required in the public interest. In these circumstances resort to
statutory enactments has been a necessary and natural expression of
democratic objectives in the complexities of the modern world. But
direct legislative regulation, enforceable in the courts, while entirely
appropriate where concretely definable prohibitions are involved, is
likewise beset with vitiating difficulties in most instances. Legislatures
do not possess the necessary competence to deal in detail with the
numerous and intricate economic matters over which they may exercise
jurisdiction. Many practices subject to control-such as unfair methods
of competition and unreasonable or unjustly discriminatory rates and
charges are not adequately definable, even as prohibitions, without
