HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
11
pressed misgivings as to the risks involved in this move into the large
and complex area of communication systems which extend into every
avenue of human experience, an area, moreover, in which experts of
every stripe and color had established strong vested interests, his reply
was that in spite of the imperfections which were certain to be present
in this working in strange territories, experts might put right what was
wrong, and much more important, that it was high time that localized
monopolies of knowledge held by antiquarians and others were broken.
down.
It was perhaps inevitable that there should be misunderstandings and
occasionally hostility, but there was cooperation too and a genuine and
growing interest on the part of those who could help. And there were
sufficient indications of awakening interest in alien quarters to make
him reasonably certain, before his work was cut short, that the venture
had not been in vain. I saw much of his correspondence over this past
summer and can attest to this change, but I cannot help feeling that
the years of the early 1940's must have been for him very lonely years.
In his later work, technology and pricing factors cease to provide the
backbone of his enquiries and come to serve more and more as starting
points. Major changes over history in the technology of communications
are themselves culturally conditioned, and Innis' writings on law, re-
ligion and politics attest to the absence of the technological determinism
with which he is sometimes charged; he was too aware of the close inter-
relations of technology with institutions and physical environment to
fall into this trap. In his analysis of the determinants of change in com-
munications systems and the consequences of such change in specific
cases there was one test of performance which he invariably applied,
namely, the degree or extent to which these changes strengthened the
element of monopoly in communications networks, or conversely, week-
ened or destroyed obstacles to the free exchange of ideas or information.
In his reflections on twentieth century industrialization of the means
of communication in the United States, the arch-criminals are identified
as vast monopolies of knowledge which, as he put it, threaten "a con-
tinuous, systematic, ruthless destruction of elements of permanence
essential to cultural activity" (Changing Concepts of Time, p. 15).
The villain of the piece is bias in communications which in present-
day North American culture is manifest in its fatal obsession with things
of the present, its one-sided concern with the logistics of territorial con-
trol (whether this be geographic area or markets), its reliance on politi-
cal action for the solution of all ills. Changes in communication, both in
form and content, have led to a neglect of problems of duration, stabil-
ity, a neglect which has destroyed empires in the past. In his own.
words:
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
