The demand for children is not quite parallel, however, to that for
ordinary durable goods. The relevant time interval is too long to per-
mit a household to test ex ante expectations respecting children by ex
post experience. No one can foresee what the genetic grab bag will
bring forth, probably a useful citizen, possibly a genius, perhaps a
hooligan or a cretin, but by then corrective response may no longer be
possible. There is less uncertainty, of course, on the supply side. Most
direct costs are fairly predictable, and optional additional costs need
not be incurred unless they fall short of the prospective benefits. Less
predictable is the impact of trade and longer cycles, or of increases in
unemployment consequent upon upswings in the relative number of
young job-seekers, cobweb-like sequels to earlier upsurges of births
[12]. Less predictable also, especially in a modern demand-oriented
economy, is the response over time of a household to its increasing ac-
cess to durable goods and imperfectly foreseen complements thereto.
For in this sector of consumption the income elasticity of demand can
easily rise above unity and, if this rise is widespread enough, divert in-
come from support of procreation to purchase of durable products and
complements. The full significance of the emergence of durable goods
for reproductive and other activities has yet to be analyzed adequate-
ly. Indeed, the Ford Foundation might fund a project permitting a cor-
porate body of social scientists to follow through life a representative
cohort, or better still a sequence of cohorts chosen at (say) 10-year
intervals, and ascertain how and why patterns of expenditure change.
and with it fertility and related behavior.
Underdeveloped countries, United Nations demographers find, differ
from developed in respect of both fertility and indices of moderniza-
tion. Gross reproduction is below 2 in all developed countries, and
above 2 in the underdeveloped world which includes nearly all African,
Asian, and Latin American countries. Within the modern world there
is no correlation between variation in indicators of modernization and
variation in fertility; and within the underdeveloped world there is
only slight correlation. The data do suggest, however, that there exists.
a threshold, or a set of thresholds, movement beyond which by indica-
tors of modernization is quite likely to be accompanied by a percepta-
ble downward movement of fertility, though not by one immediately
adequate to offset falling mortality.
Convincing evidence of a widespread, imminent, and pronounced de-
cline of fertility and natural increase remains to be uncovered. The
United Nations reports: “the launching of new countries upon the
transition from high to low fertility seems to have been temporarily
halted." The evidence reveals no continuing inverse relation between
population density and fertility in keeping with the logistic theory;
only a mildly inverse relation is found in both the developed and the