disputes, and, in general, the behavior of powerful pressure groups,
whose heedless aggressiveness in advancing their own interests evidences
either ignorance or indifference to the general welfare.
These are some of the overt expressions of the go-getter spirit, which
the pressure groups have taken over from the old-time rugged individualism.
There are, however, other manifestations of it which impede
progress toward full efficiency and productivity, even when there is no
thought of restricting output, dividing the market, or of the ruthless use
of economic and political power. These manifestations, indigenous in
planless private business, include overbuilding of plants, increase of
unnecessary risks, and the various devices by which inefficient firms are
kept in business.
Adam Smith and the classicists had no worry about the obstructive
effect of selfishness and consolidated greed. They were convinced that
out of the conflict of acquisitive interests would come maximum social
efficiency and the maximum wealth of nations. No coördinated planning,
either by government or business, was necessary. The invisible
hand, working through free competition, would, they thought, with
Mandeville's Fable of the Bees, turn private vices into public benefits,
and establish a beautiful harmony between private acquisitiveness and
social productivity. But the economic harmonies failed to appear. The
economic man was no fool. He knew that he could feather his own nest.
better by monopoly, if he could get it. By all possible devices, he
avoided competition. Even the workers gradually learned that they
must take a leaf out of the textbook of monopoly, and through organization
and combination pit their collective power against that of the
employers.
The outcome of all this is that the country is segmented into consolidated
and powerful interest groups. Atomistic competition has given
way to amply financed and skillfully marshalled group conflict. The
policy of every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost has
been displaced by group loyalties and group planning-not over-all
planning to maximize the national income, but planning for advantage
in the unending battle of distribution. This is an irrepressible conflict,
which economics is unable to deal with, even in theory.
Many economists have thought that marginal productivity gives us
the basis for a scientific theory of distribution, and even an objective
criterion of distributive justice. This theory is one of our pet illusions.
Beautiful in form, it lacks substance. It is a disguised residual theory,
and every residual theory begs the question, because the only determinant
it can find for the priority share is custom, or the so-called
"going-rate." The sooner we admit that there is no objective criterion
of distributive justice, the better we shall understand the close connec-