miss the true nature of the dilemma. It can be solved, if at all, only
through coordination of policies, covering a range that goes even be-
yond the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System. We have, I think,
made important progress from the thinking of the 'twenties, which
ran mainly in terms of controlling investment through the effects of
interest rates on borrowers, and which assumed that banks would al-
ways be "loaned up." While we should not swing to the other extreme
-the borrower will always be important-the conditions of the 'thirties,
characterized by large excess reserves and a mounting public debt,
shifted the emphasis toward the lender; and, as I said earlier, it was
under these conditions (the pump-priming phase) that we began to
appreciate the possibilities of the combination of deficits and easy
money as instruments of recovery.
A debt, however, of the present size presents new problems-prob-
lems of debt structure and of debt holding, as between bank and
non-bank investors, problems of how to control the great institutional
investors, such as the insurance companies, while at the same time
making efficient use of them for Treasury financing, problems as be-
tween marketable and non-marketable debt, of finding proper instru-
ments of debt for small savers, problems of achieving a correct pattern
of maturities, so that the debt will not pile up unduly in the short or
long or intermediate sectors. 18 All of these questions in the sphere of
debt management have a bearing on the effectiveness of monetary
control, for the less the debt is capable of self-management, the greater
becomes the need for central bank support of it, and the more mone-
tary control as an economic stabilizer becomes submerged by the con-
flicting need of supporting the government security market. Thus in-
evitably it is a dual problem rather than a problem of jurisdiction.
My mind for a long time has run chiefly on the thought that with
a large debt, widely held, small changes in interest rates could be ef-
fective in creating uncertainty, preventing the monetization of the
debt and "playing the pattern"; and that, combined with a proper fiscal
policy, such a policy of flexible interest rates could be developed into
an effective instrument of economic control. But without adequate
fiscal cooperation, the task, to say the least, would be most discourag-
ing. As experience since the war has taught us, even when the budget
is balanced, monetary control has to step aside temporarily when the


#### Split:
18 As an example of what happens when there is an undue proportion of short-term debt,
we may observe the experience of England, where short-term rates, even after the war,
had to be frozen completely. It is significant that in its recent measures attempting to
regain some control over the money supply, Britain has had to unfreeze its short-term
rates, and at the same time to make efforts toward reducing the amount of such debt
relative to longer-term debt.