KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
17
have to be operated through vending machines, avoiding personal con-
tact between the parties to exchange. At this point, I turn to more
detailed, though brief and inadequate, notice of the limitations of free-
dom, from the standpoint of policy, or of freedom as a policy. This
will be followed by an even briefer glance at the alternatives and the
final practical problem, making up the classical three parts of the
argument.
There is a paradox about the general problem of economic organiza-
tion. One can state a case which sounds much like an “air-tight” justi-
fication of market freedom or laissez-faire. But if it is easy to "riddle"
the notion of means-end rationality as an explanatory principle, this
is still more true of the apologetic for reliance on the free market as
an ideal social policy. We also encounter a logical paradox in the con-
cept of freedom. On one hand, it is not discussable, being the pre-
supposition of discussion, and freedom in conduct is inseparable from
that in communication. Yet we are brought up short by a glance at
our own history. For it is only in the small island of our own modern
(post-Enlightenment) West European culture that the axiom is ac-
cepted; in history as a whole, including rather especially European
history in the preceding epochs, political or economic liberty, and even
more, religious-moral-intellectual freedom, was emphatically rejected,
on principle, if it was ever contemplated as a possibility. The aristo-
cratic, slave-holding town-republics of ancient times hardly call for
mention as exceptions. Though we can learn from their experience and
discussion because some problems of democracy arise within any rul-
ing class (unless it is an established hierarchy headed by an absolute
authority like Hitler, the Pope or Stalin, with effective provision for
the succession). The rise of the strange phenomenon of modern liberal-
ism is undoubtedly to be explained in part as a reaction against the
peculiar dogmatism, intolerance, and obscurantism of medieval "Chris-
tian" Europe. But much of the former spirit is with us yet; and the
superposition of an ethic of extreme freedom and individual rights on
an extreme authoritarianism of obedience and duties based on status,
is surely a chief source of the moral-intellectual confusion of our age,
of which we hear so much (and so much nonsense). And a kind of
pendular principle in history no doubt helps to account for the new
turnabout which has carried so much of the world back to despotism.
My own view of the social-economic policy is not greatly concerned
with the notion of treating the individual satisfaction-function as a
welfare-function and proceeding to the notion of a social maximum in
terms of some relation between individual maxima. It is too clearly
indefensible to treat "happiness" or the "good life" for the individual
as a definable end to be achieved by a definite technique; and even
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:04:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
