It is a scientific revolution of the very first magnitude-indeed I
consider the so-called theoretical revolutions of a Ricardo, a Jevons, or
a Keynes to have been minor revisions compared to the vast implica-
tions of the growing insistence upon quantification. I am convinced
that economics is finally at the threshold of its golden age-nay, we
already have one foot through the door.
The revolution in our thinking has begun to reach public policy, and
soon it will make irresistible demands upon us. It will become incon-
ceivable that the margin requirements on securities markets will be
altered once a year without knowing whether they have even a modest
effect. It will become impossible for an import-quota system to evade
the calculus of gains and costs. It will become an occasion for humor-
ous nostalgia when arguments for private and public performance of
a given economic activity are conducted by reference to the phrase,
external economies, or by recourse to a theorem on perfect competition.
This is prophecy, not preaching. You have listened to sage advice on
what to study and how to study it for well over a century. If you had
heeded this advice, you would have accomplished almost nothing, but
you would have worked on an immense range of subjects and with a
stunning array of approaches. Fortunately you have learned that al-
though such advice is almost inevitable on such occasions as the retire-
ment of an officer of a professional society, it is worth heeding only
when it is backed by successful examples. I have no reason to believe
that you left your tough-mindedness at home tonight, and I shall re-
spect it. I assert, not that we should make the studies I wish for, but
that no one can delay their coming.
I would gloat for one final moment over the pleasant prospects of
our discipline. That we are good theorists is not open to dispute: for
200 years our analytical system has been growing in precision, clarity,
and generality, although not always in lucidity. The historical evidence
that we are becoming good empirical workers is less extensive, but the
last half century of economics certifies the immense increase in the
power, the care, and the courage of our quantitative researches. Our
expanding theoretical and empirical studies will inevitably and irre-
sistibly enter into the subject of public policy, and we shall develop a
body of knowledge essential to intelligent policy formulation. And
then, quite frankly, I hope that we become the ornaments of demo-
cratic society whose opinions on economic policy shall prevail.
REFERENCES


#### Split:
1. W. S. JEVONS, Methods of Social Reform. London 1883.
2.
,
The State in Relation to Labour. London 1882.
3. MOUNTIFORT LONGFIELD, Lectures on Political Economy (1834).
4. OLIVER MACDONAGH, A Pattern of Government Growth, 1800-60. London
1961.