DOUGLAS: ARE THERE LAWS OF PRODUCTION?
the two great wars are, however, likely to present difficulties.
41
4. The deviations of the actual or observed values from those which
we would theoretically expect to prevail under the formula are not large
and indeed are slightly less than we would expect under the random
distribution of errors of sampling and of measurement. It is submitted
that the total number of observations, namely over 3,500, is sufficiently
large so that if the results had been purely accidental, this degree of
agreement would not have occurred.
5. The instances of large deviations of the actual from the theoretical
values can in most cases be explained as being caused by imperfect
competition and by expanding demand in the case of the plus deviations.
and by contracting demand, "sweating," and possibly "excessive" com-
petition in the case of the minus industries. This would indicate that if
these complications could be eliminated, the agreement between the
actual and theoretical products would be greater.
6. That, taken in the large, there is an almost precise degree of
agreement between the actual share received by labor and that which,
according to the theory of marginal productivity, we would expect labor
to obtain.
In conclusion, may I emphasize again that there is much work which
remains to be done on this question and that a lifetime would be all too
short to probe the many problems which present themselves. Is it too
much to hope that the succeeding twenty years may see further progress
along this line and that if the older generation finds it impossible to carry
on such studies, the younger economists may find such lines of
inquiry a challenge to their ingenuity and abilities? ³¹ I have always
been struck by the old Hindu saying, “This is no door but only a little
window that opens out upon a great world." Since this is peculiarly
applicable to the studies which I have attempted, upon that note I shall
end.
31
"Some of the studies which badly need to be carried out are (1) to develop the produc-
tion function for each and every year over a long period, say 1910-1940, for Australia, New
Zealand, and Canada; (2) to carry on studies of the production function for a large
number of specific firms and within specific industries and hence connect the theory of the
firm and of the industry with that of the economy; (3) to carry on further studies, along
the lines of Mr. Olson, on inter-spatial variations in real income and the factors affecting
them; and (4) to develop production functions for agriculture, mining, and public utilities.
In order to bring our analysis down to date in the larger countries, it is highly desirable
that statistics on the quantities of capital be collected for Great Britain, Sweden, and the
United States.
