HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
25
Radio has no very long past and cannot be interested in evoking the past nor
in showing the unity of past and present.
To summarize these remarks-Americans tend to be interested primarily
in the present and they do not like to rely on traditional solutions to such
problems as present themselves. It might be more accurate to say that Ameri-
cans think of themselves as trail blazers living in a world so new that traditions
can be of little value. My father felt that this attitude was very dangerous
because in so far as it exists—it deprives Americans of any criteria by which
they can judge the state of their country or compare it with other countries.
When definitions of progress also progress there are no standards by which
progress can be measured. George Orwell's book 1984 describes a country in
which the newspapers present each item of news as the fruit of progress which
they depict as having always been aimed at this goal.
My father thought that the origin of America's conscious scorn for tradi-
tion derives from the tradition of the frontier. The people of the United States
have built up a new country in a new continent. Americans have become rich
and contented by developing the resources of the new world and they have
felt that they brought about this state of well-being by the work of their own
hands. Americans have felt and still feel that they owe the old world nothing.
Americans do not want to be interested in the continent from which they came.
They refuse to compete with European countries in art or in any other tradi-
tional means of expression. Thus the American tradition is to refuse to have a
tradition. Instead of escaping from tradition America has developed and
obeyed her own tradition slavishly.
The American tradition of not being interested in the past has meant a
concentration on immediacy. The range of interests and means of expression
of modern American culture are severely limited by her refusal to be inter-
ested in any media of communication which have been used before. America's
tradition will make it very difficult for her to go beyond the narrow range of
interests which she has set for herself, but until she does go beyond these
limits her culture must retain the difficulties and dangers which it now has.
This idea, that America is blindly holding onto the tradition that she has
no tradition, is the subject for a presidential address that my father and I
discussed last summer.
DONALD INNIS
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.ff:ffff:ffff:ffff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
