HOOVER: IMPLICATIONS OF ECONOMIC CHANGE
13
industry cut prices and wages whenever necessary in order to get busi-
ness away from the other fellow in the "reprehensible effort" of each
corporation to maximize its profits. Suppose this so-claimed laboristic
point of view spread to the managements of all large industries where
marketwide collective bargaining existed and where the elasticity of
demand for the product was such that a price increase could be passed
on without an unacceptable decline in sales?
Under the circumstances I have outlined, the industrialists and
labor leaders of such industries are making decisions which determine
to a significant degree what the shares in the national income of pulp
mill workers or steel workers and indeed of almost everyone else are
to be, at least until such time as the labor leaders and industrialists in
other industries or perhaps the leaders of farm organizations can
counter the move by means of similar action.
In the case of such industries we need not be surprised if the federal
government is confronted in the future as in the past with the necessity
for intervening in the setting of prices and wages. Indeed, if it has
seemed that the government has had to intervene in the past because
management and labor leaders have not been able to agree, it may well
be that government will have to intervene in the future because they
do agree. If government did have to take over this sort of responsi-
bility for the major sectors of our economy the effect upon the char-
acter of our economic system would be profound.
Fortunately, however, expressions like "The nation cannot exist half
slave and half free" seem not to apply to our economic system. I
repeat, that in this organizational economy of ours, competition in new
and old forms does still play an enormously important role even though
the changes from old-style competition and laissez faire have been
fundamental. This organizational economy continues to function in
spite of what seems each time to be irreconcilable conflicts between
great power aggregates of capital and labor and in spite of recurrent
general economic crises on a national and international scale.
The organizational economy functions as well as it does because
prices do not have to be exactly those which on some two-dimensional
demand and supply graph would exactly "clear the market." There is
not for each worker some precisely determinable marginal productivity
wage, any variation from which would throw the economy into dis-
equilibrium and chaos. Nor does the allocation of resources have to be
perfectly efficient or conform to that of some rigidly simplified model.
Furthermore, particularly in a productive and technologically progres-
sive economy like our own, the distribution of the benefits of some
quasimonopoly price advantage among management, shareholders and
laborers in an industry may be no more unjust nor more explosive as a
