6
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
concepts under different circumstances and as their own thinking pro-
gresses. Followers must be on the alert not to become more royalist than
the King.
If economics is the study of man in the process of producing and con-
suming what he needs and what he wants, then it is apparent that the
subject matter of his inquiry is constantly shifting. Not so many years
ago no one needed or wanted gasoline because the motor car had not been
invented, and no one wanted moving pictures or radios because they
had not yet been imagined. A horse-and-buggy economist in a motor
age is of no greater use than an isolationist in the atomic era. An econo-
mist, in order to merit this designation, must keep his mind open to the
realities of the ever changing pattern of economic life. When his thinking
becomes rigidly confined by a set of unchanging dogmas, his usefulness
rapidly declines while the amount of mischief he may do becomes for-
midable.
The success of the economists' efforts, however, even if they do their
best, will depend on the behavior of the different economic groups which
make up society and on effective organization of the state. But, while
progress in the rationality of the behavior of economic units is neces-
sarily a slow process to which understanding of economic forces can
contribute a great deal but only gradually in the course of time, better
adaptation of the machinery of government to the tasks it must perform
in modern society is an essential preliminary step long overdue in the
upward climb toward a smoothly functioning economy.
For progess on this road better organization of the government, more
direct and effective ways of translating programs into action must be
devised and instituted. Democracy, it has been said, is the rule of medi-
ocrity. There is an element of truth in the allegation. For mediocrity
represents the average, and a rule of the majority cannot be too far re-
moved from the understanding of the average. While leadership in a
democracy must remain in touch with the average, it should strive to
be ahead. It should lead-not follow. Leadership that is below the aver-
age is disastrous; leadership that is on the level of the average holds
little promise of advancement. Leadership that is ahead of the average
results in progress. It may make all the difference between a rise and a
decline in the tide of a nation's life.
Consequently, government must be so organized as to encourage bet-
ter than average leadership and assure it of the country's support. This
is the opposite of what actually prevails. It is regrettably true that exist-
ing governmental organization is such as to make it well nigh impossible
even for brilliant leadership to achieve progress, except at times of crisis
and then only at great hazard and with much delay.
We have a Congress which has great powers and is controlled by one
