KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
The principle of freedom is apparently accepted in modern civiliza-
tion-consequently called "liberal"-on three or four grounds, which
overlap somewhat. First, and most commonly cited, it is instrumental
to the realization of other ends accepted as rightful. Modern thought
locates value in the individual rather than making him an instrument
to the purposes of the state or its ruler. And it is assumed that the
normal adult person is ordinarily a better judge of his own interests,
values, or well-being, than any agent of society (bureaucrat) given
authority over him is likely to be. Second, freedom itself is a thing.
men want, and have a right to, even possibly at the cost of a formally
better management of one's affairs by an overlord of any kind; the
normal person prefers within wide limits to "make his own mistakes."
Third, it is a "value," a thing the individual ought to want, even ought
to have if he may not choose it, a part of the modern ideal of the dignity
of the person. Thus the laws of liberal states do not allow men to sell
themselves (or their children) into "involuntary servitude," even if
they so choose, though everyone is free from day to day to place him-
self or his property under the direction of another, on terms satisfactory
to both parties. This is the entrepreneurial relation, which is in a real
sense the central feature of the modern free economy. Finally, there is
a fourth, "pragmatic" reason, for extending the scope of freedom;
policing is costly to the public authority and coercion itself needs to be
economized.
From the standpoint of explaining actual behavior, one can only
"submit" that people want to economize and that their efforts to make
resources go further are more or less successful; also that correct appor-
tionment of resources among uses is a way of economizing, as are
specialization through exchange of products and the organization of
effort under specialized direction. A large sector of individual and
social behavior is then more or less fully "explained" by these prin-
ciples. How far they go, and what other principles or unsystematic
occurrences may have to be considered, I obviously cannot take up
in detail here.
Certainly economic principles are subject to sweeping limitations as
to their explanatory value. They tell us nothing about concrete eco-
nomic facts, what wants people have, what goods are produced and
exchanged, what resources and techniques are employed, what distribu-
tion takes place. The justification of treating these data in a purely
abstract way is the significance of theory for policy, and I shall come
back to that. Further, it is easy for a critic to "riddle" the principle
of abstract rationality. No one thinks, I hope, that consumers con-
sciously strive to maximize satisfaction, well-being, or whatever it be,
by acting in relation to a known function connecting the state in ques-
