12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
departments committed to its support, would carry great weight with
the public, which placed it in power. It would also impress Congress.
Adoption in some form of the proposal for Cabinet members to appear
before Congress in person and answering questions in open meeting
would contribute further to coöperation between branches of the gov-
ernment and to recognition of complete accord on policy by the adminis-
tration. It may be feasible for candidates for the Presidency to name
their cabinets before election, so as to make the ministers more conscious
of their responsibility to the people, the ultimate source of their au-
thority.
An American form of responsible government could develop out of the
beginning made by the Full Employment Act if it is supported by the adop-
tion of practices that would increase its effectiveness. The organization
and principles laid down by the constitution and sanctioned by Ameri-
ican tradition would be preserved, and at the same time the government
would become more purposeful and more responsive to the demands of
changing conditions.
To economists and to this Association, the recent step toward a bet-
ter formulated and better implemented public policy is not merely a
matter of general interest. It is a Council of Economic Advisers that
has been established and it is the Council's Economic Reports that are
expected to constitute the heart of public policy. This new instrument
of government gives the profession of economists a broad opportunity
of rendering greater service to the nation and places on them and on this
Association a correspondingly grave responsibility.
What Congress has said to the economist is in the language of the
gaming table: "Put up-or shut up!" That's the economist's dilemma.
Since economists by occupational selection and by training are not able
to shut up the only alternative is to put up, that is, to produce the
men, the data, and the understanding, and to promote the public sup-
port essential to the execution of effective economic policy. To this pur-
pose the efforts of economists and of their Association must be rededi-
cated on this its Diamond Jubilee. The Ivory Tower has been con-
quered by events and razed to the ground. The economist is out in the
open and must come to grips with problems of state.
