ance; and economists in increasing numbers seek partial or total employment
outside of academic halls. There are many economists who,
like other thinkers, remain aloof and follow their own thoughts in an
arduous effort to discover the eternal verities. The world needs these
men and the profession is proud of them, for every important practical
forward step in the progress of humanity has had its origin in the abstract,
supposedly impractical thinking and dreaming of the scholar; the
physicist, biologist, philosopher, and student of social problems.
The closet thinker may be compared to the scientist who invents and
perfects means of achieving military and industrial objectives; other
economists may be likened to the military or industrial army who must
utilize the results of the thinking of the scientist in helping to solve the
problems of the day. Both phases of the economists' work are necessary
to society; the profession has a responsibility for developing both kinds
of economists the thinker and the doer. But while it may be feasible
for the thinker not to be a doer, it would be fatal for the doer to refrain
from thinking.
It should be recognized that for many, if not for most, economists
the quiet and peace of the ivory tower has been lost; the confusion and
struggle of the market place is upon them. Many have gone to work
there, and have rendered yeoman service to the economy and the state.
But they have done so as individuals, for they have had little, if any,
organized support from their colleagues in the Association, little facility
for sounding the trends of thought among their fellow workers.
Some method should be devised by which the public, and more particularly
members of the Association, could find out how the economists
of the country stood on important issues. One way to promote this would
be to create a small committee on Public Issues. Such a committee could
select issues on which the views of members would be sought. It could
take responsibility for wording the questions, calling for assistance on
persons best qualified to give it. The entire Association, or the portion.
of it which might be expected to know most about the subject, would
then be circularized. After the replies had been received, the Secretary
of the Association would issue a statement to the effect that the 4000
members of the American Economic Association have been asked a certain
question; of this number-so many replied; of the replies-so many
took one view, and so many another. This could be refined by classifying
the replies geographically, by field of interest, and in other ways. Such
a statement would not commit the Association as such to any viewpoint,
and therefore would not violate the letter or the spirit of its charter. But
it would enable the public to know currently how the profession stood
on an issue and would give economists themselves a way of knowing
better what other members of their craft were thinking.