KUZNETS: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INCOME INEQUALITY
21
per cent in the United Kingdom. The shares of the top quintile are 55
per cent in India, 50 per cent in Ceylon, and 56 per cent in Puerto Rico,
compared with 44 per cent in the United States and 45 per cent in the
United Kingdom.³
This comparison is for income before direct taxes and excluding free
benefits from governments. Since the burden and progressivity of direct
taxes are much greater in developed countries, and since it is in the
latter that substantial volumes of free economic assistance are extended
to the lower-income groups, a comparison in terms of income net of
direct taxes and including government benefits would only accentuate
the wider inequality of income distributions in the underdeveloped coun-
tries. Is this difference a reliable reflection of wider inequality also
in the distribution of secular income levels in underdeveloped countries?
Even disregarding the margins of error in the data, the possibility
raised earlier in this paper that transient disturbances in income levels
may be more conspicuous under conditions of primitive material and
economic technology would affect the comparison just made. Since the
distributions cited reflect the annual income levels, a greater allowance
should perhaps be made for transient disturbances in the distributions
for the underdeveloped than in those for the developed countries.
Whether such a correction would obliterate the difference is a matter
on which I have no relevant evidence.
Another consideration might tend to support this qualification. Un-
derdeveloped countries are characterized by low average levels of in-
come per capita, low enough to raise the question how the populations
manage to survive. Let us assume that these countries represent fairly
unified population groups, and exclude, for the moment, areas that
combine large native populations with small enclaves of nonnative,
privileged minorities, e.g., Kenya and Rhodesia, where income inequal-
ity, because of the excessively high income shares of the privileged
minority, is appreciably wider than even in the underdeveloped coun-
tries cited above. On this assumption, one may infer that in countries
* For sources of these data see "Regional Economic Trends and Levels of Living,” sub-
mitted at the Norman Waite Harris Foundation Institute of the University of Chicago in
November 1954 (in press in the volume of proceedings). This paper, and an earlier one,
"Underdeveloped Countries and the Pre-industrial Phases in the Advanced Countries: An
Attempt at Comparison," prepared for the World Population Meetings in Rome held in
September 1954 (in press) discuss issues raised in this section.
In one year since the second world war, the non-African group in Southern Rhodesia,
which accounted for only 5 per cent of total population, received 57 per cent of total in-
come; in Kenya, the minority of only 2.9 per cent of total population, received 51 per cent
of total income; in Northern Rhodesia, the minority of only 1.4 per cent of total population,
received 45 per cent of total income. See United Nations, National Income and Its Dis-
tribution in Underdeveloped Countries, Statistical Paper, Ser. E, no. 3, 1951, Table 12, p.
19.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 01:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
