1945]
DAVIS: STANDARDS AND CONTENT OF LIVING
3
sumed; living includes consumption and much more: working condi-
tions, cushions against major and minor shocks, freedoms of various
kinds, and what I tentatively call "atmosphere." The level of con-
sumption or living, as I see it, is that actually experienced, enjoyed,
or suffered by the individual or group; the standard of consumption or
living is the level that is urgently desired and striven for, special
gratification attending substantial success and substantial failure yield-
ing bitter frustration.
These distinctions, far too important to be safely ignored or obscured,
are not really difficult to grasp and apply. In daily life we are con-
tinually aware that our operating standards are not identical with
the perfect or the ideal. We readily admit disparities between our
individual standards of order, cleanliness, honesty, courtesy, workman-
ship, etc., and the levels of our actual performance. Roughly, if not by
some form of average, we are accustomed to distinguishing between
group standards and levels in these and other respects. Even in the
fields of government and administration, experts and observers alike
find no difficulty in differentiating between performance levels, current
operating standards, and vaunted ideals.
Differences in planes of living are by no means proportionate to
differences in consumption levels. It is entirely possible for consump-
tion levels to rise while planes of living fall, for consumption standards
to rise while consumption levels remain depressed, and so on. In some
countries advance in per capita consumption levels is the principal
factor promoting advance in consumption and living standards; in
others raising consumption standards is prerequisite to raising consump-
tion levels and planes of living. When planes of living are forced down,
as occurs in very different ways in depression and war, radical readjust-
ment of current standards of consumption and living is necessary to
avert social disaster; and such disaster is inevitable if margins for
readjustment of levels or ability to readjust standards are lacking.
In expressing policy aims for the post-war period, for the United
States, for other advanced countries, or for those that are more or less
backward, it is important to be clear as to whether the broad objective
is to raise consumption levels (as most spokesmen now seem to mean),
or planes of living (which I consider a far superior aim), or standards
of consumption or living (which may also be desirable).
Consumption Levels and Standards
Actual consumption or consumption level is a valuable concept, es-
sential in many phases of analysis; but it should be called by its right
name and no other. It is a sort of aggregate of the food, fuel, and other
nondurable goods used up, the services of houses, automobiles, clothing,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:56:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
