14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
What they need is a hundred acres or more of additional land per farm
on which they can grow feed and as pasture for livestock, and power
equipment with which to handle this land, mostly in periods of the year
when they are not doing cotton or tobacco work.
Small low-income farms like these in Tennessee and most of the
South are not, of course, limited to this region. There are sections where
they are common in almost all the states, even in Western Pennsyl-
vania and conspicuously in blocks of counties in southern Illinois and
Indiana and southeastern Ohio. In fact, farming of this order prevails
in the mountain and Piedmont belt of the Appalachian chain and its
extension all the way from Maine to the Ozarks in Missouri and eastern
Oklahoma. There is much low-income farming in the northern cut-over
and sandy outwash areas of the Great Lakes states.
In 1950 more than a fourth of the farms of the United States clas-
sified as "commercial" had product sales of less than $2500, and more
than an eighth had product sales of $250 to $1200. Another 30 per cent
were classed as "part-time" or "residential" because their operators
worked off the farm more than 100 days, or sales of farm products were
less than $250 or less than the off-farm earnings. A large fraction of the
part-time farmers have off-farm earnings that make up fully or largely
for the deficiencies in their farm returns, and part of the residential
farmers have important other sources of income. They may be essen-
tially retired farmers or even landlords, for example. Sixty per cent
of the part-time farmers reported owning automobiles in 1950, and
50 per cent of the residential farmers, as compared with only 40 per
cent of the lowest-income group of commercial farmers. All told, more
than a third of the 5,379,000 farms reported in the 1950 census had in-
comes pretty close to the subsistence level on farms with too limited re-
sources in their present state of development, and a majority of these
had too few acres even if these were fully utilized.
The number of these small low-income farms has been declining
relatively, at least since 1940. Just how much is difficult to state be-
cause of changes in the Census definition of a farm. The decline has
been most marked in the years 1950-55. The Census of 1954 reports
600,000, or 11 per cent, fewer farms than in 1950. Nearly two-thirds of
this decrease was in the number of Class V and Class VI commercial
farms, that is, of farms with product sales of less than $2500 in 1954.
Half the decrease was in farms of less than 50 acres. By 1975 it now
seems reasonable to expect that half of the remaining small low-income
farms will have disappeared as separate farms, and that the Census that
year will report not more than 3.8 to 4.0 million farms, counting in the
part-time and residential farms the same as now.
