and the acceleration principle are assigned the major rôle. To make
the transformation complete (but still presumably in the name of
Keynesian economics), Hicks leaves out money entirely, except for a
couple of supplementary chapters which he clearly regards as of very
secondary importance. What now has become of Keynes' effort "to
push back" the theory of money toward becoming a "theory of output
as a whole"? Clearly, the new environment of the postwar period has
sent us upon a new search for an acceptable "complex of suitabilities";
and Keynes' theory, as theory, is becoming rapidly submerged.
One of the most interesting aspects is the treatment of investment.
What, some of the critics are now asking, is autonomous investment?
Is there any such thing really? How distinguish between autonomous
investment and induced investment? Is there not a continuous inter-
play? It there any such thing as a rising rock-bottom consisting purely
of autonomous investment? And does it not seem ironic that in dynamiz-
ing Keynesian theory we find it necessary to transform his whole treat-
ment of investment, and turn it round and make it walk in the opposite
direction from that which he had assumed? In Keynes' own theory,
there was no place for induced investment. Investment was the inde-
pendent factor, tending to decline, and consumption was the induced
factor, dependent upon income, in accordance with the fundamental
law of the propensity to consume.
V
Economic theorizing seems to me pointless unless it is aimed at what
to do. All the great theorists, I think, have had policy as their central
interest, even if their policy were merely laissez faire. Keynes' greatest
virtue, I have always felt, was his interest in economic policy; and it
has been said, despite the paucity of discussion of specific policies in
the General Theory, that he started with what he regarded as the policy
requirements of the time and built his theory around them. I find this
quite understandable, and my main objection, as outlined above, is to
the pretension to universality which seems to be the inescapable bane
of theorizing.
9
We do not escape this bane when we turn from “general theory" to
* Probably, along with the rising bottom of autonomous investment, Hicks would


#### Split:
regard as the most unique feature of his theory the concept of a full-employment ceiling
which provides the downward turning point in induced investment. The autonomous in-
vestment floor remains throughout as an unexamined assumption, and the full-employment
ceiling is purely formal logic, which (as in the case of Keynes' full-employment "equi-
librium") would probably rarely conform to reality, except under direct controls and in
special circumstances, such as war or defense. It is interesting to note, too, how the
full-employment "equilibrium" has now become merely a "turning point."
10 And a continuous interplay between investment and consumption?