Working conditions include hours, variety, and intensity of labor,
provision for health, safety, comfort, convenience, and training if necessary,
regularity of employment and security of tenure, opportunity for
advancement, personnel relationships, even beauty of working environment
and lacks in these several respects.
By possessions I mean physical stocks of goods, savings and investments,
insurance protection and related rights, developed abilities and
connections, and other reserves for cushioning the actual or potential
shocks of life.
Among freedoms are included not merely freedom of religion, expression,
movement, association, and participation in government, but
also freedoms to learn and to earn, to choose one's occupation, to select
among a variety of goods that combination which suits one, to venture
and to advance or fail.
Under atmosphere I include such assets as the sense of being
wanted, of security, of harmony with one's fellows-in home, school,
farm or factory, community, and the larger world—and such liabilities
as repellent fears of death, illness, friendlessness, unemployment, war,
and the strains incident to broken homes and to heightened uncertainties
of many kinds. The hope of progress, or lack of it, is often a
highly important element.
All of these and more, I think you will agree, figure in the individual's
content of living. Each of us can readily estimate how a change in any
element in this complex has affected or would affect his own plane of
living. With larger margins of error, we can understand them as applying
to groups small and large.
Neither individual nor group is continually conscious of all such
components in the plane of living, or can be fully articulate about its
details. But the same is true of the individual's philosophy of life and
the policy of a nation: they exist even if not comprehensively formulated
and clearly expressed. Some components of the plane of living,
indeed, are taken for granted or lie dormant, as it were, until some
crisis reveals their existence or removal. The preciousness of life itself
is seldom acutely realized until it is in danger of being lost. Many
Americans were hardly aware of the degree to which they cherished
certain freedoms and atmosphere elements until, with Pearl Harbor,
these were threatened, curtailed, or lost.
It is highly important that we should not overlook or ignore these
non-consumption components. In the improvement in the American
plane of living over a generation or a century, it is beyond question that
reductions in full-time working hours, betterment of factory and farm
conditions of work, enlargement of insurance protection in many forms,
and increasing freedom from isolation which the telephone, automobile,