1942]
SLICHTER: THE CONDITIONS OF EXPANSION
13
unfavorable shift in the investment function is not offset within the
usual range of national income by the favorable effect of the redistribu-
tion upon the savings function.
The problem which confronts the individual investor or the enterprise
is not the effect of general increases in wages on prices, but the effect
of the spread of union organization upon the probable return from a
particular investment. When one examines this matter, it is difficult
to avoid the conclusion that large and powerful unions tend to reduce
the marginal efficiency of capital. It is true that collective bargaining
frequently raises plant efficiency by giving management better informa-
tion about conditions and by giving representatives of the men an
opportunity to point out mistakes of management. Nevertheless, power-
ful unions increase the likelihood that successful concerns will have to
share their prosperity with the employees. Until recently there has been
no offsetting protection against losses. The development of the policy of
union-management coöperation during the last twenty years has in-
teresting theoretical implications. Most of the coöperative plans have
been started in high-cost plants. They have been a way by which the
workers in these plants tried to safeguard their jobs. If union-manage-
ment coöperation were to become widespread in high-cost plants, it
would go far to offset reduction in the marginal efficiency of capital
produced by the encroachment of unions on the profits of the most
successful concerns. For the time being, however, one must conclude
that the spread of unionization tends to reduce the marginal return of
capital.
Are unions likely to reduce the return so seriously as to limit materially
the capacity of the economy to expand? That is a possibility, but
not a necessity, as the experience of the United Kingdom and Sweden.
shows. One may assert with confidence, I think, that even a large and
powerful labor movement will be less harmful to expected returns on
investments than the shift in power that has been going on since 1933.25
volume of transactions. Hence two zones might be distinguished: one in which expenditures
change proportionately less than changes in wages and in which wage increases are
unfavorable to employment; and one in which expenditures change proportionately more
than changes in wages and in which wage increases are favorable to employment. In the
former zone, the usual one, the effect of wage changes on the investment function would not
be offset by their effect upon the savings function; in the latter zone, the effect of
wage changes upon the investment function would be offset by their effect on the
savings function. The latter zone would appear to be an unstable one because wage
increases, by reducing unemployment, would produce more wage increases and because
wage cuts, by producing more unemployment, would produce more wage cuts. As a
matter of fact, wages in relation to prices apparently never get down into the zone of
instability.
25 Such a period of shifting creates great uncertainty over the future of costs. In the
face of such uncertainty managers may be more reluctant to make long-term commitments
than they would be after unions are better established and stronger but when economic
