determine whether later we have to retrace our steps. They will be the
acid test of our economic and political intelligence, and of the reality
of our democratic protentions.
Democracy
Since it is my purpose to try to show the close relation between
economy and democracy, I ask you to consider with me the nature of
democracy. Democracy has four fairly distinct aspects: political, civil,
ethical, and economic.
Political democracy is an instrumental, not an intrinsic, value. It is
the only form of government we dare trust. It is essentially an insurance
policy. It is the right to vote, to hold office, to form political parties,
and to criticize the government, often unintelligently, sometimes
mendaciously.
It is commonly said that a people get the kind of government they
deserve. This is only a half truth. There are distinct limitations on the
ability of a people to get the kind of government they ought to have.
We no longer live in a simple agrarian society, in which an occasional
town meeting sufficed for all governmental purposes. We live in an
economy of complex technology, extreme specialization, and close interdependence
of functions. All these far transcend state boundaries and
local interests. This fact is one cause of the decline of local government.
It is also the main reason why opposition to expansion of the
functions of the federal government will in the long run prove illconceived
and futile.
The limits to effective political democracy are fairly well defined.
The people can vote their preferences in regard to general policies and
values, but much further they cannot safely go. Even with a much
higher level of general education than we now have, they cannot be
competent to pass judgment on complex economic technicalities, on
which even experts disagree, such as the machinery of international
finance, social security reserves, and dozens of other technical matters.
The moment they, or their lay representatives, interfere with the technical
implementation of general policies, they are likely to do as much
harm as good, even if their interference is not under the adroit leadership
of selfish pressure groups.
Although civil democracy is as vital an aspect of democracy as the
other three, I shall dismiss it in a few words. Its basic values are individual
liberty and equality before the law. It is epitomized in the Bill
of Rights, which we did not rediscover until after Pearl Harbor. But
the Bill of Rights needs to be extended and interpreted in the light of
the principles of economic and ethical democracy. Equality before the
law cannot be limited by sex or race. Yet we know that it is. Women