There was strong opposition among economists to the original plat-
form of the American Economic Association, despite its hedging on the
most controversial issue of that day, the tariff. This opposition came
principally from the supporters of unadulterated laissez faire who oc-
cupied the chairs of political economy in the largest universities. In
1887, the Association substituted for its platform the brief statement
that its purpose was "the encouragement of economic research, espe-
cially the historical and statistical study of actual conditions." All of
the dissenters, however, did not join the American Economic Associa-
tion until, after a few years, it expressed complete neutrality on eco-
nomic views and methods—a position it has consistently held ever since.
While neutral collectively, it is to the credit of economists that as
individual scholars they have never ceased to be interested in questions
of public policy. Few economists have held the view, which Charles A.
Beard described as the dominant position in American thought around
the turn of the century, and in accordance with which “government was
looked upon as the badge of original sin, not to be mentioned in polite.
society." Economists of all schools of thought have often interested
themselves in questions of public policy. Many of the major advances
in economic theory have resulted almost directly from attempts to find
solutions for practical public policy questions. This can be said of
classical economics as well as of Keynesian and neoclassical economics,
no less than of institutional economics. More economists today spend
part of their active careers in government service than ever before. It
is becoming commonplace that economists are in and out of government
service several times during their lives and quite a number are working
simultaneously for the government and in academic teaching or in re-
search positions. Economists in the past have made significant contri-
butions to the solution of practical problems of public policy and are
doing so today.
But it is also true that economists have not received the recognition
in the United States in the realm of public policy which they enjoy in
other free countries. There has also developed much doubt whether
economics should concern itself with problems of public policy. The
clearest evidence of this is the change in the name of the social science
of which we are students. What was once “political economy” became
"economics" after the first world war, with but few exceptions.
While economists think, talk, and write about practical problems,
their participation and influence is quite limited and it is doubtful
whether it is increasing. Thousands of economists are employed in
government. A former president of the American Economic Association
is a distinguished U. S. Senator. A few other members of the Congress
hold membership in the Association. The Council of Economic Advisers