Still, it is significant that the great critics of the classical tradition
generally chose to controvert the Wealth of Nations rather than the
writings of later members of his school.
David Ricardo. In time Ricardo came to be the whipping boy for
continental romantics and historicists. Yet there is not much evidence
that they had to read him closely in order to find fault with his ab-
stract methodology. I must confess that I find Ricardo hard to give
semester-type grades to. He is par excellence an economist's econo-
mist. A sweet man, Ricardo is certainly one of the luckiest that ever
lived. And here I have not so much in mind his success in speculating;
although he was no slouch in that department, as some facts from his
biography illustrate.*
Ricardo was lucky in being on the spot when the Napoleonic Wars
were causing the value of money to misbehave in the most interesting
fashion. He was lucky to have James Mill as taskmaster and press
agent. He was lucky in having been deprived of higher education, so
that his resulting written expositions had the clumsiness necessary to
give that ingredient of obscurity so conducive to a reputation for great
profundity. Finally, and I hope it comes as no anticlimax, Ricardo was
lucky in being profound.
* Cut off for marrying outside his faith with a few thousand dollars, within twenty
years Ricardo had become a millionaire a few times over, the equivalent in this present
day of taxes, higher prices and higher general real incomes, to tens of millions of dollars.
The Duke of Wellington may have regarded the battle of Waterloo as "a damned near
close-run thing," but David Ricardo urged before the battle that his friend Robert Malthus
go the limit in holding British government bonds; and Malthus, a parson with small
means and a convex-from-above utility function, lived to reproach himself for not having
followed that advice. Retiring young from business to devote himself to leisure, study,
politics, and being a gentleman, Ricardo astutely realized that his numerous children were
not chips off the old block in financial acumen; so, and this is purely my conjecture,
being convinced by his studies that land rent tends to rise as capital and labor progres-
sively grow, Ricardo arranged to buy self-sufficient gentry estates for his offspring, suc-
ceeding so well in his purpose as to keep his descendants out of shirtsleeves until the
end of the century and, at the same time, conferring upon them the bonus of being
absorbed into county society. At the urging of his friends, Ricardo indulged in conspicuous
consumption by buying his way into Parliament. (He did this by invoking the later
doctrine of "opportunity cost”: i.e., he lent £20,000 interest-free to an Irish holder of a
rotten borough, one which Ricardo never bothered to visit.)
Ricardo's parliamentary career was something of an anticlimax. He was not a gripping
speaker, and the build-up of his reputation was a grave handicap. It is interesting that
Ricardo was a genuinely disinterested man and generally favored measures that were
against the interest of landlords. When once accused of having a special interest in some
proposal, he candidly replied that his interests were so diverse that he himself could not
tell on which side the balance of his Hicksian income effects would fall, thus showing
himself to be a master of quadratic programming of the type needed for optimal Marko-
witz portfolio balancing; and little wonder, since in 1817 Ricardo's comparative cost
theory had involved him in linear programming. One feels he was a natural at trading
in, and arbitraging, Lagrangean multipliers and other dual-price variables. See Volume 10
of the Sraffa edition of Ricardo's work for most of the facts from which this account
has been fabricated.