12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
same questions were asked of the scientists in the land-grant agricul-
tural colleges for their particular states. An average of all the answers
for all farm products was 86 per cent. Much additional cash outlay
for equipment, seeds, fertilizer, sprays, and buildings in some cases,
is needed to apply these new technologies, but the added return, even
under average management, is much in excess of the outlays as long as
the supply of the product does not press on the market and depress
the prices too sharply.
To demonstrate that the foregoing is not just speculation, a group at
Harvard University, working in close collaboration with six New Eng-
land state agricultural experiment stations and extension services and
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, made careful case analyses of a
sample of 241 dairy and dairy-combination farms in fourteen repre-
sentative areas in the six New England states.³ These analyses identi-
fied for each of these farms a set of changes or adjustments which the
operators of these farms said in 1947, 1948, and 1949 that they were
willing to undertake as a means of increasing their farm output and
income. These changes consisted in the main of improving their crop
and pasture land so as to increase its yields, thus being able to feed
more cows and raise more of the replacements for their herds, at the
same time improving the quality of the forage and feeding more of it
so as to get larger outputs per cow, and using more power and ma-
chinery so as to get a larger output per worker. The adjustments thus
identified were projected to increase the net incomes of these farms
by a half in the five to ten years it would take to make them. They
would increase the output of milk by more than 40 per cent.
At the end of only three years, 146 of the farms had progressed to
the point of having made over half of these adjustments and had in-
creased their net incomes by 50 per cent with only a slight increase in
the labor input. Only 35 of them had made little or no headway in the
adjustments and were still farming pretty much as before. Many of
these were farmers who already had pretty good incomes and had little
interest in further exploiting their opportunities. Others were of the type
too conservative to move off dead center. The remaining 60 were af-
fected by major changes in agriculture, such as the following: two
farmers had died; four had consolidated with other farms; seven had
sold out and bought farms with more possibilities; 25 had shifted to
full-time or part-time off-farm work; in nine a son or partner had left
the farm for off-farm work; six had shifted to poultry or other lines
3 Wheeler, R. G., and Black, J. D. Planning Successful Dairy Farms in New England
(Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1955). This study was financed by the Charles H.
Hood Dairy Foundation.
