along with other significant variables, to changes in population size and
age composition, both of which are quite predictable in the short run.
Until recently, the inverse of the stagnation argument, the thesis that
excessive population growth generates inflation, especially in underdeveloped
countries, received little attention.
Perhaps the greatest reversal of opinion in the period 1930-65 is
that relating to the role played by land and other natural resources in
economic development and the disenthralling of populations from Malthusian
traps. The importance of this role has been played down for a
variety of reasons. First, investment in scientific discovery, applied
technology, and education has been found to account for a major fraction
of the increase in output per head in advanced countries, although
recently the need to complement this type of investment with physical
capital has again begun to be emphasized. Second, input of the services
of land and natural resources per unit of GNP has greatly decreased in
advanced countries. The composition of an individual's consumption.
changes as his income rises and becomes more biased toward products
with relatively small resource content. This is reflected in a belowunity
income elasticity of demand for most organic and inorganic raw
materials. Furthermore, considerable economy has been achieved in
the use of raw materials, with the result that resource-service input
per unit of output of many specific types of products has fallen. For
example, the input of cropland service per unit of output of agricultural
products declined by nearly half in the United States between
1930-32 and 1960-62. In short, changes in the character of both demand
and technology have slowed down the growth of various material
requirements, sometimes to the pace of population growth and sometimes
even below it. Third, discovery and technological change, together
with substitution at producer and consumer levels, have greatly.
augmented both the visible and the immediately potential stock of
fuel, mineral, and related sources of natural-resource services. Man, it
is supposed, is confronted by chains of natural-resource substitutes
which modern molecular engineering and alchemy can subvert to his
purposes, replacing links that weaken and elevating inferior sources
(e.g., taconite rock) as well as substituting less expensive for more expensive
sources of particular natural-resource service needs [1] [33].
For example, energy should prove producible in large amounts through
fission assisted by breeder reactors, and in almost unlimited amounts
should fusion prove technologically and economically feasible.
A measure of parochialism permeates this optimistic account. It neglects
the Apostle Matthew's dictum that "for whosoever hath to him
shall be given, and he shall have abundance," and the observation in
Deuteronomy "that man doth not live by bread only.” Skill and capi-