1944]
WOLFE: ECONOMY AND DEMOCRACY
7
Ideal equilibrium should not be construed in terms of the physically
possible maximization of per capita material income. Man does not live
to produce, he produces to live. Values other than those associated with
material goods will always limit the amount of endeavor men are willing
to devote to physical production. Equilibrium is a mathematical con-
cept, but it is also institutional. Leisure and material goods are con-
flicting values, and the relative valuations society places on them are
reflected in laws, customs, and contractual stipulations limiting hours
of labor and the like. Other institutional restrictions, some of them de-
creed by selfish group interest, dictate who shall and who shall not
work. Such discriminations, rooted mainly in race and sex prejudice,
are incompatible with full-employment economy. Other limitations re-
sult from decision to reserve some part of our irreplaceable natural
resources to future generations. None of these limitations, other than
those restricting opportunity to work, in any way invalidates the
equilibrium ideal. Once the people decide how hard and how long they
want to work, and how rapidly they wish to exhaust their natural re-
sources, there is, for any given state of the arts and any given avail-
able supply of resources, an ideal distribution of resources between the
various industries. This is the balanced economy which, and only which,
achieves the highest per capita output and the highest per capita real
income.
Obstacles to Balanced Economy and Full Production
Economics is a trouble-shooting art. Despite all the dithyrambic ad-
vertising about the brave new world industry is going to give us after
the war, we are still a long way from permanent full employment and
continuous full production. It is our function, as economists, to find
out why. It is monumental irony that we come so much nearer full
production in wartime than at any other time. Why is this? Since
human wants are indefinitely expansible, why should there ever be
overproduction or underemployment? Why do economists and business
leaders lie awake nights worrying about the ability of private enter-
prise to furnish full employment after the war? And why the pessimistic
undertone of feeling that with the utmost coöperation between business
and government, or, conversely, with complete freedom of business
from government regulation, full employment, if attained, can be main-
tained for only a few years? These are not mere rhetorical questions.
We cannot bypass them. What, then, are the basic obstacles to con-
tinuous maximum production?
I shall not try to catalogue them. One I shall only mention, and not
comment upon. That is the dynamic, disturbing effect of rapid techno-
logical change. The other main obstacles, as I see them, fall into three
categories: (1) moral and religious traditionalism; (2) ignorance and
