BURNS: ECONOMIC STABILITY
11
rising proportion of women in the labor force, in the sizable and in-
creasing proportion of men who hold down more than one job, in the
slackening of the long-term decline of the average work week in manu-
facturing despite the increased power of trade unions, as well as in-
directly in the improvement of living standards and the great upsurge
of population. Indeed, the expansive forces on the side of consumption
have been so powerful that we must not be misled by the cyclical re-
sponses of consumer spending, small though they were, to which I
referred earlier. There are no continuous records of inventories in the
hands of consumers; but if such statistics were available, we would
almost certainly find that consumption proper, in contrast to consumer
spending, did not decline at all during any of the postwar recessions.
In view of these developments in the realm of the consumer, it is
evident that the force of any cyclical decline of production has in recent
years been reduced or broken as its influence spread through the econ-
omy. Production has remained unstable, but the structure of our econ-
omy has changed in ways which have limited the effects of recessions
on the lives of individuals-on the numbers who receive an income, the
aggregate of personal incomes, consumer spending, actual consumption,
and to some degree even the numbers employed. It is, therefore, hardly
an exaggeration to assert that a good part of the personal security
which in an earlier age derived from living on farms and in closely knit
family units, after having been disrupted by the onrush of industriali-
zation and urbanization, has of late been restored through the new in-
stitutions that have developed in both the private and public branches
of our economy.
IV
In concentrating, as I have thus far, on the changes of economic or-
ganization which have lately served to reduce the impact of business.
cycles on the lives of individuals, I have provisionally taken the cyclical
movement of production for granted. Of course, if the fluctuations of
production had been larger, the impact on people would have been
greater. On the other hand, the stabilized tendency of personal income
and consumption has itself been a major reason why recent recessions
of production have been brief and of only moderate intensity. Many
other factors have contributed to this development. Among them are
the deliberate efforts made in our generation to control the business
cycle, of which I have as yet said little.
In earlier generations there was a tendency for the focus of business
thinking to shift from the pursuit of profits to the maintenance of finan-
cial solvency whenever confidence in the continuance of prosperity
began to wane. At such times experienced businessmen were prone to
