5. On the production side, combine a “soil bank” program with the
present conservation program of the Agricultural Conservation Program,
at the same time reducing the extent of dependence on acreage
and marketing quotas.
The reason for the emphasis on expanding distribution of foods of
livestock origin is first that these are coming into most serious surplus,
and that at least six times as much land is needed for a given number
of calories of these as for the same number of calories of cereals and
root crops. A 6 per cent surplus of cereals becomes a one per cent
surplus of meat, eggs and dairy products if the cereals are first fed to
livestock.
Perhaps also it needs to be made perfectly clear that this plan is far
from being the same as the Brannan Plan, although it does have in
common with it the compensatory payment feature. A few days after
the Brannan Plan was offered to Congress, what is here outlined was
published in a short press story under the charitable title "The Brannan
Plan Can be Salvaged." If it could have been made over as here
suggested, and accepted by Congress, much of the difficulty that has
arisen since would have been avoided.
A program along the foregoing lines will be more costly than the
1955 program has been, but only for the first few years. Over five
years, it should cost very little more.
Since this section was first written, there has been published by the
Conference on Economic Progress a pamphlet under the title "Full
Prosperity for Agriculture," which proposes a return to rigid 90-per
cent parity price support and yet to dispose of enough more food and
other farm products to poor people at home and abroad to balance the
production that will result, all within the next few years. All that needs
to be said about this proposal is that it fails to sense the realities of
the situation both on the production and on the consumption side. The
food and cotton given away must result in additional consumption, not
replace what is moving into consumption through existing marketing
channels, or it will depress prices still further. Guaranteed high prices
for all that farmers are now qualified, equipped, and ready to produce
will step up production faster than in 1940 to 1948. There is complete
disregard in this report of the simple fact that with 90 per cent of
parity assured, the producers who have adopted the new technologies
even no more than part way, and these are producing two-thirds of the
output, will earn large incomes for themselves, and that production.
control has largely broken down as a means of controlling their total
output of all farm products.
It is also notable that the income figures in this report make no
allowance for the reduction in number of farms and farm workers since