wholly new vision of the expansibility of our economy. But we must
not forget that the extraordinary expansion of output in the war, though
it was an important factor in postponing inflation, did not prevent our
getting it later on. Perhaps equally impressive has been the expansion
of output since Korea, even though the defense program seems to be
lagging in some important respects. Industrial production in 1951 was
10 per cent above 1950, and 25 per cent above 1949; it surpassed
every other year except the two peak war years. Total output of goods
and services, in real terms, was larger than even in the peak war year
1944. This is all the more noteworthy, in that we embarked upon the
rearmament program from an already very high level of employment
and production, whereas at the outset of the war there was still large
unutilized capacity.
Since recovering from the initial shock of Korea, and the later Chinese
intervention, we have managed to maintain a precarious balance
between inflationary and deflationary forces. How long this balance
may continue will depend largely upon two factors, the size and speed
of the rearmament program, and the public behavior as to saving.
Saving, from a low point of 2.2 per cent of disposable income after taxes
in the buying panic after Korea, rose last year to about 10 per cent.
Against this anti-inflationary factor (and the further one that we may
not soon repeat the great increase in inventories that followed Korea),
we have to set the size and speed of the armament program, combined
with a continuing high volume of investment. Though I am of course
quite incompetent on the military side, it must be emphasized that
this will be our most serious economic problem, if we are not to dissipate
our defense effort through renewed inflation; and if this is a difficult
problem for us, it is of course much more so for our Allies. We
should not rely too much on mere increase in output. Though less
serious than a scarcity inflation, the expansion of output is an inflationary
process, in that incomes are paid out before goods appear in the
market; and military expansion means that incomes are paid out to
produce goods not available for civilian consumption. Unless the program
is kept within feasible bounds, or unless we can count on increased
saving (than which nothing is less predictable), we may find
ourselves undoing with one hand what we are trying to do with the
other, and also creating a grave prospect of recession when we come to
the period of levelling off the rearmament program.
VIII
If domestic problems raise questions about the relation of theory to
policy, this is even more the case in the international sphere. Since,
however, this paper is already long, and my paper at last year's meeting