4
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
vision of economists. For society today is confronted with a vital issue.
What must be decided in the immediate future is whether an answer to
pressing economic problems can be found within the framework of capi-
talism and free enterprise or whether economic organization must move
in the direction of socialism or communism, or whether a combination
of the two systems offers the best solution. These alternatives involve
political, moral and spiritual dilemmas, but the fundamental question
is economic: shall enterprise continue largely under private ownership,
or shall it be increasingly or wholly turned over to the state? From the
socialist or communist point of view, the important questions appear to
have been solved-many decades ago, while for protagonists of private
enterprise answers to the questions are still to be developed. Communism
places a period after its dogmas, in fact, an exclamation point, while a
question mark is still discernible at the end of deliberations on economic
dilemmas by proponents of individual enterprise. This appears to give
the communist approach the advantage of certainty, and leaves capital-
ism under the apparent handicap of indecision. But in the long term,
free enterprise may gain the more important advantage of greater flexi-
bility, which makes it more adaptable to changing economic forces. Its
opportunities are many, the challenge of events is vibrant, and all in-
tellectual resources must be directed toward meeting it.
In this critical hour the economist and his Association have a great
opportunity and a corresponding responsibility. On the discharge of this
responsibility depends not merely the standing and future of the pro-
fession-but a vastly more important issue as well-the form of future
economic life. For if economists cannot devise a way of making a system
of free enterprise produce results satisfactory to the mass of the people,
it is certain that the trend will be away from free enterprise and toward
some form of socialist state; and while experience has not shown con-
clusively that a socialist state can tolerate spiritual freedom-which
democracies value above all, neither has it been demonstrated that so-
cialism must necessarily be totalitarian and is irreconcilable with free-
dom.
In the critical period ahead, when these questions must be answered
by events, economists and their Association are under obligation more
than ever to help in the development of correct solutions to pressing
problems that confront the economy. On the development of such solu-
tions and their incorporation into national and international economic
polícy of this country depends the progress of world reconstruction. For
without the maintenance of economic strength in the United States and
its use for rehabilitating the world, there is little hope for the future of
western civilization.
The suggested method of testing the views of economists might be
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:58:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
