18
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
to a broad canvas and by suggesting their possibilities and limitations
when applied to other language or cultural groups. How far, for ex-
ample, are we justified in asking students from other societies essentially
agricultural—let us say the Chinese-to conform to the tests applied
in doctorate examinations primarily reflecting the characteristics of a
system which has grown up in relation to an industrial society? The
problem of semantics alone compels resort to the devices of the parrot
in reliance on memory. Graham Wallas as a result of his wide experi-
ence with Indian students has reminded us that the English language
has only slight emotional associations for them, that examinations
emphasize only phrases and words of books and that training in English
for the Indian civil service probably produced results similar to the re-
sults in the Chinese civil service.2
Within the West itself the problem of communication is scarcely less
acute. In European countries more profoundly influenced by canon law
and Roman law the social sciences develop along different lines than in
Anglo-Saxon common law countries. Talcott Parsons has suggested
possible common ground but it may be questioned whether he recog-
nized sufficiently the contrast between the work of Pantaleoni (and his
emphasis on mathematical economics and in turn his influence on
Pareto) and that of common law economists. The impact of Pareto's
training in engineering and in science was evident in a concern with
the mathematical approach to the social sciences. In turn Pareto was
compelled to write a sociology to accompany his rational approach-
a phenomenon with little precedent in the Anglo-Saxon world.
The problem of the application of theory becomes even more serious.
The significance of language as a differentiating factor in Europe has
probably increased with the telephone and radio. In turn statistics.
will vary in their significance as national groups, based to an important
extent on language, tend to concentrate on the range of statistics which
show their pre-eminence in various lines, particularly those which
emphasize the largest elements or those increasing most rapidly in their
societies. Progress has been defined as that kind of effort that can be
measured in statistics. Statistics tend to take the heart out of mathe-
matics. They are collected with relation to specific distinctive problems
of states with different constitutions, federal and unitary. They are sup-
pressed and distorted for military purposes and their value depends
much on the literacy of the populations concerned. The significance of
Keynesian economics to administrative systems limits possibilities of
comparison. Statistical calculations which become a basis of national
policy have implications for statistics compiled later in relation to the
effects of the policy and make comparisons with other nations more
"The Art of Thought (London, 1926), p. 254.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
