18
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
improving the bargaining position of the group for the purpose of get-
ting a larger share of an income flow with little regard to the effect
upon the size of the total income flow." If special groups attain power
and use it to enlarge their relative income position regardless of others,
the total is in time so seriously reduced that the absolute amounts.
going to them as well as to others are curtailed. Hence his first case
merges into his second; group interest is in the end consistently pro-
moted only by bargains that are, as he puts it, “based upon a high
valuation of general interests and involve restraint in pressing special
claims which conflict with general interests."
In other words, individuals in any category prosper most fully over
the years as self-disciplined participants in a functional group; and
such a group maximizes its permanent prosperity by discovering and
performing most perfectly its functional task in the total economy. This
to my mind suggests the answer to Mill's quest for a means by which
economic science can discover objective values in a world of change.
Such values are not to be found in the subjective demands, from the
most whimsical to the most calculated, of separate individuals. Neither
are they to be found in the rigid determinations of authoritarian govern-
ment since, even when the purpose is sincere, these must in the nature
of the case be subtly suffused with the subjective evaluations of the
legislator and the official. Still less can they be found in the pecuniary
outcome of partisan struggles between power groups which, if the
groups be unequal in size, result in arbitrary or coercive settlements
and, if they be substantially equal, result in economic impasse and
lower productivity. They are most surely to be approached through the
operations of spontaneously affiliated functional interest groups, demo-
cratically organized for the declaration of the interest held by members,
and for bargaining methods of discovering the most practicable means
for simultaneous realization of the largest number of such interests or
for the revision of claims and redirection of effort in the light of better
understanding of operative possibilities and needs. For a government
elite, performing in a vacuum so far as operative responsibility and
sharing in financial results are concerned, such organization substitutes
a vital process of joint administration, with responsible parties negotiat-
ing the varied compromises of competing interests experimentally and
subject to pragmatic testing and re-negotiation.¹
13
18 Many people would no doubt consider the omission of the consumer from my list of
interest groups a surprising and inexplicable oversight. This omission, however, is not due
to mere inadvertence but to a settled belief that, for the purposes of this analysis, the
interests to be considered are workers, capitalists, and managers, with the farmer standing
as a special type of worker-manager. It is my belief that adjustments economically sound
for workers, managers, and capitalists in the broad view and in the long run must take
account of the interest of the consumer. Furthermore, that interest is constantly and
effectively registered by consumers through their market behavior, and this can be
