writing in 1838, had an analytical power and freshness that is breathtaking?
But who in his right mind could argue that Cournot had been
a great force on the history of ideas: what Paris salon preoccupied
itself with sellers of mineral water? Except through possible indirect
influences of his teachings, Cournot's impact on ideology must surely
have been negligible.

I quite agree. In many ways the history of a subject's technical
analysis is easier to write precisely because it need not involve the
determination of social influencings.2 Tonight we do not want to linger
on analytics, except perhaps to draw the obvious moral that, if economists
spend more and more of their time on highly technical mathematics
and statistics, they must not be surprised if the intelligent man
of affairs comes to ignore this part of their activities. It is true that
Voltaire and Madame du Châtelet, his great and good friend, wrote
profusely on Newton's universal law of gravitation; but this really
amounted to vulgarization of that subject, gross vulgarization on the
part of Voltaire and neat vulgarization on the part of that gifted lady.
While we should not minimize the importance of vulgarization-I
mean communication—we must not blink the fact that this is an area
where Gresham's Law operates in its most remorseless fashion: vulgar
vulgarization drives out subtle, just as strong ideology outsells weak.
The split, between "the inside look" of a subject in terms of the
logic and experience of its professional development and its implications
for the man-in-the-street or the academician down the campus,
is well recognized. No one gets a Nobel Prize for an essay on the relationship
of quantum mechanics to free will and God; but one who
has already received such a prize will get a better hearing for his
random or systematic thoughts on the topic. Nor, these days, do you
get appointed to chairs of economics by virtue of your social elo-
2 If the history of science is still generally in a crude form, that is primarily because




#### Split:

scholars have just recently begun to take it seriously. In the case of mathematics, there is
a most ludicrous ignorance of the true sequence of contributions: if a formula, such as
Lagrange's interpolation formula, is attributed by name to a person, the betting is good
that small research will show it appeared in earlier writings. What I have in mind here
is not the statement that there is nothing new under the sun and all knowledge is a
repetition of previously known knowledge: on the contrary, such a statement is the
reverse of the truth; mathematical knowledge has been cumulative and, with enough
research and luck. we might hope to clean up the false history of the subject. The situation
in mathematics is especially simple if one takes the view that the objects of mathematical
research are theorems and that most importance attaches to the date of their first
rigorous proof. Thus, it is meaningful to say that the "strong ergodic theorem" goes back
to G. D. Birkhoff in 1931, and that J. v. Neumann deserves the credit for two-person
zero-sum game theory. (But if one is also interested in conjecture, heuristics and partial
insight, the matter is not so simple. Some modern mathematicians, one feels, will rename
Fermat's Last Theorem to Schwartz's Theorem if the first man to prove it happens to be
named Schwartz.) In economics, datings are harder: thus I cannot tell you who first
disproved "the labor theory of value," much less who originated it.