per cent rate of population growth absorbs annual savings approximat-
ing 5 per cent of national income, but he did not anticipate excessive
saving. Such confidence gave way, however, to fear of the advent of a
stationary population, despite Mill's earlier description of its advan-
tages. "Investment” (or savings-offsetting expenditure) had been freed
meanwhile of its moralistic trappings, and made a, and after the ap-
pearance of Keynes's General Theory in 1936, the strategic variable in
employment theory and policy. Given little population growth, invest-
ment would be inadequate because provision would no longer have to
be made for large population increments, and at the same time there
would be too little inclination to invest in improving the environment,
quality, and productivity of those already here or replacing those here.
This concern reflected an excessive estimate of the difficulties sup-
posedly attendant upon adjustment from a higher to a lower rate of
population growth, in an economy made sensitive to the contractile im-
pact of the acceleration principle by a high ratio of reproductive
wealth to population. In fact, J. R. Hicks, in his review of the General
Theory (Econ. Jour., June 1936, p. 252), declared population to be
Keynes's "strongest card," and three years later added (Value and
Capital, Ch. 24) that the "whole Industrial Revolution of the last two
hundred years" had been “such a disappointing episode in human his-
tory" because (perhaps) it had been “nothing else but a vast secular
boom, largely induced by the unparalleled rise in population." Alvin
Hansen clearly posed the problems in his address to this body in 1939
(Am. Econ. Rev., March 1940, pp. 1-15), at a time when economists
were not yet writing about compensatory public investment in an afflu-
ent society. There were critical responses to exponents of stagnation
theory, of course, especially G. W. Terborgh's respecting the favor-
able behavior of investment in a past marked by falling popu-
lation growth [34], and those of economists who believed that small
adjustments in a flexible economy could easily bring annual savings
and offsets thereto into balance and assure "full" employment in an
economy whether population was growing appreciably or not. Man
need not be slave to the stork in the twentieth century any more than
he was in the late nineteenth. Ansley Coale [12, p. 371] aptly capped
this theme in 1960 when he pointed to implications of current Ameri-
can fertility levels:
Thus a continued secular economic boom could gain partial support
from a continued baby boom. But after a century this trend would
produce about a billion Americans, and after two centuries some six
billion. There must be a better way to stimulate employment.
After all, it should be quite easy to adjust saving and/or offsets thereto,