20
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
United States is concerned lies largely in how much of other goods we are
able and willing to import from the rest of the world, or how much we
spend in travel abroad or in foreign investments. In the aggregate these
countries cannot buy food materials and cotton from us unless we give
them some buying power by buying from them. Individual countries, or
groups of them, can of course do so by triangular exchange, but not all
of them together. As our country advances farther its people will want,
and with some products definitely need, more and more from other
countries. But still there will continue to be, for as long as we can see
into the future, a strong limitation on foreign demand for our farm
products. Most other countries will meet their needs for more farm
products in part by improving their technology and their agricultural
resources, in part by trade with other parts of the world with resources
much more undeveloped than ours-with Africa, for example-and in
part by reductions in their birth rates. The key to this latter will be
the further extension of communication until almost all families every-
where are brought within the range of talk about health in general and
family size in particular. What is now happening to birth rates in Italy
and Quebec will be happening in more and more countries. All this
adds up to a prospect for very little larger sales of our farm products
to other countries after 1975 than before, even though this nation has
more than its share of the good lands of the earth.
What I have said should point to the foolishness of the computa-
tions of world yearly totals of food supply and population, as if the
world's population were feeding out of a common food trough. I re-
gret to say that the Food and Agriculture Organization and the United
Nations are still inclined to do this.
As will be developed later, what will be the composition of the
export farm product-mix will depend in part on public agricultural
policy and programs. For example, if the policy of subsidizing, by
means of quotas and price supports, hand- and mule-labor cotton-
growing in the Old South is continued, cotton exports will decline
because the returns to cotton labor will be so low, even with the price
supports, that this labor will move out of the South at augmenting
rates. Even now, many cotton farms in the Old South are not using
their full quotas. The families have found better employment than
growing cotton. Tobacco will in time have the same experience. But
in a free world market, the mechanized cotton growing of other parts
of the South and West can probably compete with that of any other
part of the world.
The decade after 1975 will, in any case, show further disappearance
of low-income farming. What will be left of it after the year 2000 will
be only that of older farmers and their wives with simple wants who
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
