The same sort of confusion about the scope of problems and models
for their solution has been fostered in recent writings on the theory of
the firm: models have been condemned or rejected because they could
not be used for purposes for which they had not been designed, and
significant differences in the questions to be answered have been obscured
or underemphasized.

Let us again pose four typical questions and see which of them we
might expect to answer with the aid of “price theory." (1) What will
be the prices of cotton textiles? (2) What prices will the X Corporation
charge? (3) How will the prices of cotton textiles be affected by
an increase in wage rates? (4) How will the X Corporation change its
prices when wage rates are increased?

Conventional price theory is not equipped to answer any but the
third question; it may perhaps also suggest a rebuttable answer to the
fourth question. But Questions 1 and 2 are out of reach. We could not
obtain all the information that would be required for their answers and
there is, therefore, no use burdening the models with variables remaining
silent and inactive throughout the show.

We ought to guard against an easy misunderstanding of our denial
that conventional price theory can predict actual prices of specified
goods. Prediction of future prices of a particular commodity may in
fact be quite manageable if we know its present price. It should be obvious,
however, that this is Question 3, not Question 1. Or, one may be
able to predict prices on the basis of good information on production
cost. But this presupposes that we know the demand for the commodity
and assume it will remain unchanged; which again comes down essentially
to evaluations of changes of some variables with others held
constant, that is, to Question 3.

If the number of firms producing cotton textiles is large and the X
Corporation does not supply a very large part of the aggregate output
of the industry, price theory may suggest an answer to Question 4, although
this is not the purpose of the theory and there may be a considerable
chance for the suggested answer to be wrong. The point is that a
model of a theoretical firm in an industry consisting of a large number
of firms can do with a much smaller number of assumptions, provided
the model is used to predict, not the actual reactions of any one particular
firm, but only the effects of the hypothetical reactions of numerous
anonymous "reactors” (symbolic firms). If it were to be applied to
predictions of reactions of a particular firm, the model would have to
also wish to determine the speed of driving, the frequency and length of stops at roadbe


#### Split:

side stands, and all the rest.
