fundamentally, they did undermine Keynes' key theoretical proposi-
tion, namely, that even in a world of flexible prices, a position of equi-
librium at full employment might not exist. Henceforth, unemployment
had again to be explained by rigidities or imperfections, not as the nat-
ural outcome of a fully operative market process.
The revival of belief in the potency of monetary policy was fostered
also by a re-evaluation of the role money played from 1929 to 1933.
Keynes and most other economists of the time believed that the Great
Contraction in the United States occurred despite aggressive expansion-
ary policies by the monetary authorities-that they did their best but
their best was not good enough.¹ Recent studies have demonstrated
that the facts are precisely the reverse: the U.S. monetary authorities
followed highly deflationary policies. The quantity of money in the
United States fell by one-third in the course of the contraction. And it
fell not because there were no willing borrowers-not because the horse
would not drink. It fell because the Federal Reserve System forced or
permitted a sharp reduction in the monetary base, because it failed to
exercise the responsibilities assigned to it in the Federal Reserve Act to
provide liquidity to the banking system. The Great Contraction is
tragic testimony to the power of monetary policy-not, as Keynes and
so many of his contemporaries believed, evidence of its impotence.
In the United States the revival of belief in the potency of monetary
policy was strengthened also by increasing disillusionment with fiscal
policy, not so much with its potential to affect aggregate demand as
with the practical and political feasibility of so using it. Expenditures
turned out to respond sluggishly and with long lags to attempts to ad-
just them to the course of economic activity, so emphasis shifted to
taxes. But here political factors entered with a vengeance to prevent
prompt adjustment to presumed need, as has been so graphically illus-
trated in the months since I wrote the first draft of this talk. "Fine tun-
ing" is a marvelously evocative phrase in this electronic age, but it has
little resemblance to what is possible in practice-not, I might add, an
unmixed evil.
It is hard to realize how radical has been the change in professional
opinion on the role of money. Hardly an economist today accepts views
that were the common coin some two decades ago. Let me cite a few
examples.
In a talk published in 1945, E. A. Goldenweiser, then Director of the
Research Division of the Federal Reserve Board, described the pri-
mary objective of monetary policy as being to "maintain the value of
Government bonds. . . . This country" he wrote, “will have to adjust to


#### Split:
¹In [2], I have argued that Henry Simons shared this view with Keynes, and that it
accounts for the policy changes that he recommended.