because it is so easy to think that democracy of any kind is purely a
matter of sentiment, whereas it has a solid rational foundation. I shall
now try to show what, in my opinion, that rational foundation is.
Ideal Economy
Economists hold in their hands the formula for the ideal economy.
If it were not for a few obstacles like human selfishness, ignorance, and
stupidity, they could abolish poverty in two generations. This, of
course, is not saying much, for the real task is to clear away these
obstacles, or at least to render them comparatively innocuous, and such
a task is obviously not going to be accomplished in two generations.
Nevertheless, the general outline of the ideal economy gives the objective
for the economist's over-all job analysis.
The ideal economy, it scarcely need be said, is the perfectly balanced
economic system or the general equilibrium of economic theory. Its
essential features are quickly stated. All productive resources are
"fully" utilized, according to some interpretation of that slippery term.
All productive plants are operated at the point of least unit-cost. Every
productive factor is used where it is most needed. There is thus strict
economy in the distribution and utilization of resources. The ideal result
is the maximization of per capita real income.
In the ideal economy, there would be no overbuilding of plant, no
surplus productive capacity in any industry, and consequently no restriction
of output. There would be no general overproduction, because
aggregate consumer income would equal aggregate production costs.
Demand for labor and consumption goods would be stable and continuous.
General equilibrium is both the production and the consumption
ideal. The only distributive ideal essential to it is that money income
must go to people who will promptly spend it.
I am aware, of course, that Lord Keynes has analyzed another kind
of equilibrium, which falls short of full employment, but what Keynes
is doing is to analyze certain obstacles to full-employment equilibrium.
It goes without saying that the ideal equilibrium cannot be fully
realized. If it could be reached tomorrow, it would be upset the next day
by some chemist with a new compound. But the fact that it cannot be
fully attained is nothing against it, any more than the impossibility of a
frictionless machine should deter engineers from improving lubricants,
or than the imperfectibility of man is valid ground for rejecting Christian
ethics and democracy. Though we can reach neither perfect democracy
nor perfect equilibrium, both should stand as the North Star of
our economic navigation through the shoals of institutional lags, the
disturbing currents of technological changes, and the storms of acquisitive
conflict. In the long run, we shall approach it, asymptotically, more
closely than we now dream.