1943] NOURSE: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THE COMMON INTEREST 17
concrete evidence of the power of the labor group to promote the
general industrial and public interest when management is ready to
meet with labor as a true partner in a joint enterprise. On the first
session of this meeting Professor McCabe analyzed the problem of
how wide a geographical area wage bargains should cover. 10 The presi-
dential address of last year" included a suggestion that, "Wage policy
which is now made by groups too small to feel much responsibility for
the general level of employment, might be made by units such as the
United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Association
of Manufacturers on the one hand and the American Federation of
Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations on the other."
From my own lifelong interest in agricultural economics and coöpera-
tive organization I could draw some further illustrations and more
specific suggestions as to the modus operandi of bilateral collective
bargaining. By and large, economists do not know what the basic
principles of coöperation are, and the economics of pooling has never
been professionally examined. Nor have we even bothered to study that
substantial body of operations carried on by "mutual" companies. Some
of the time of economists could profitably be directed to synthesizing
this experience in the less conventional forms of business administra-
tion. Courage and imagination should be exercised in ascertaining their
applicability to wider reaches of business practices instead of consider-
ing merely intricate regulatory schemes and short-cut resorts to govern-
ment direction or even operation of business activities.
VII
In concluding, I shall note points of contact with the addresses of
my three predecessors. Last year Professor Slichter closed his inquiry
into "the conditions of expansion" with the words: "Never have the
rewards of a broad view of common interests been more attractive.
Never has the folly of narrowly pressing special claims been greater.
The economic future of our country and of the world depends upon the
clarity with which this is seen.'
>>12
I have voiced a skepticism that this broad view of common interests
is to be effectively attained through comprehensive schemes of state
regulation or through an increasing amount of government operation.
I have, on the other hand, not fully accepted Slichter's "two ways in
which groups may advance their interests." One of these ways, he says,
“is based upon a high valuation of one's special interests, and involves
10 D. A. McCabe, "Problems of Industry-Wide or Regional Trade Union Agreements,"
Am. Econ. Rev., suppl., Vol. XXXIII (Mar., 1943), 163-173.
11
Slichter, Am. Econ. Rev., Vol. XXXII (Mar., 1942), pp. 1-21.
13
'Slichter, Am. Econ. Rev., Vol. XXXII, pp. 20-21.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:54:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
