The two optima thus far reviewed are primarily economic in content:
they represent situations without particular moral or political flavor
which, in significant senses, result mainly from individual choice. In
these cases the interference of the state has for its purpose the widening
or extending of the field of individual choice, and not "ulterior"
ends. Alternatively, it might be said that with respect to these two
optima the political choices have for their aim the improved operation of
individual economic choice. These characteristics fade away progressively
as we proceed to two further concepts of optimum.
4
I refer first to the "optimum propensity to save," a magnitude implicit
in the Keynesian general equilibrium theory, first made explicit by
Oscar Lange. The idea of an optimum amount of saving is a part of the
theory which attributes cyclical depression or longer-run stagnation to
over-saving. Optimum saving is that amount which is compatible with
full employment without inflation: more saving would spell a relapse
from full employment, and less saving would spell inflation.5
From the interested angle of the present argument, the peculiarity of
this optimum is that it runs directly counter to individual free choice. I
do not make an appeal to some mysterious "natural law" or invisible.
hand; I merely assert that with human beings as they are, some of them
spendthrift and some of them frugal, Western civilization generally
reveals aside from wars and other disasters-a tendency toward net
accumulation. With the very rich, it may appear simply as a residuum
after all consumption demands are satisfied. With some persons, again
more frequently found amongst the rich or quite well-to-do, it may arise
from the desire to grow wealthy or more wealthy for purposes of display,
controlling other people's lives, or playing the game with higher
stakes. But again, as in an earlier context, we encounter the fact that
not only is most of the national income received by the moderately and
the less well-to-do, but also that these income classes account for the
largest part of savings. With them the motives thus far mentioned are
exceptional and the one overwhelmingly important purpose is provision
for the future.
Now an economic optimum which runs in terms of limiting this
activity is indeed a paradoxical kind of optimum. Providing security
against the rainy day and old age from the fruits of one's own productive
activity may be an old-fashioned virtue, but it nevertheless provides
substantial net social saving. This does not imply opposition to


#### Split:
* Oscar Lange, "The Rate of Interest and the Optimum Propensity to Consume,”
Economica (Feb., 1938), pp. 12-32.
5 Actually, Lange's argument results in optimum investment and not optimum saving.
But for the present analysis, I accept the author's intended position and the usual interpretation
of his argument.