for meeting the depression and his offering was avidly accepted. If liquidity
preference is absolute or nearly so-as Keynes believed likely
in times of heavy unemployment-interest rates cannot be lowered by
monetary measures. If investment and consumption are little affected
by interest rates-as Hansen and many of Keynes' other American disciples
came to believe-lower interest rates, even if they could be
achieved, would do little good. Monetary policy is twice damned. The
contraction, set in train, on this view, by a collapse of investment or by
a shortage of investment opportunities or by stubborn thriftiness, could
not, it was argued, have been stopped by monetary measures. But there
was available an alternative-fiscal policy. Government spending could
make up for insufficient private investment. Tax reductions could undermine
stubborn thriftiness.

The wide acceptance of these views in the economics profession
meant that for some two decades monetary policy was believed by all
but a few reactionary souls to have been rendered obsolete by new economic
knowledge. Money did not matter. Its only role was the minor
one of keeping interest rates low, in order to hold down interest payments
in the government budget, contribute to the "euthanasia of the
rentier," and maybe, stimulate investment a bit to assist government
spending in maintaining a high level of aggregate demand.
These views produced a widespread adoption of cheap money policies
after the war. And they received a rude shock when these policies
failed in country after country, when central bank after central bank
was forced to give up the pretense that it could indefinitely keep "the"
rate of interest at a low level. In this country, the public denouement
came with the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord in 1951, although the
policy of pegging government bond prices was not formally abandoned
until 1953. Inflation, stimulated by cheap money policies, not the
widely heralded postwar depression, turned out to be the order of the
day. The result was the beginning of a revival of belief in the potency
of monetary policy.

This revival was strongly fostered among economists by the theoretical
developments initiated by Haberler but named for Pigou that
pointed out a channel-namely, changes in wealth-whereby changes
in the real quantity of money can affect aggregate demand even if they
do not alter interest rates. These theoretical developments did not undermine
Keynes' argument against the potency of orthodox monetary
measures when liquidity preference is absolute since under such circumstances
the usual monetary operations involve simply substituting
money for other assets without changing total wealth. But they did
show how changes in the quantity of money produced in other ways
could affect total spending even under such circumstances. And, more