an ideological nature but it can be removed without injury to his
scientific argument. The analysis that supports his qualified free-trade
conclusions is not- -as it was with some contemporaneous philosophers,
such as Morellet-based upon the proposition that by nature a man
is free to buy or to sell where he pleases. The statement that the
(whole) produce is the natural compensation of labor occurs, but no
analytic use is made of it-everywhere the ideology spends itself in
phraseology and for the rest recedes before scientific research. In part
at least, this was the merit of the man: he was nothing if not respon-
sible; and his sober and perhaps somewhat dry common sense gave
him respect for facts and logic. In part it was good fortune: it matters
little if his analysis has to be given up as the psychology it was meant
to be if at the same time it must be retained as a logical schema of
economic behavior-on closer acquaintance, the homo economicus (so
far as Adam Smith, the author of the Moral Sentiments, can in fact
be credited or debited with this conception at all) turns out to be a
very harmless man of straw.
Marx was the economist who discovered ideology for us and who
understood its nature. Fifty years before Freud, this was a perform-
ance of the first order. But, strange to relate, he was entirely blind to
its dangers so far as he himself was concerned. Only other people, the
bourgeois economists and the utopian socialists, were victims of
ideology. At the same time, the ideological character of his premises
and the ideological bias of his argument are everywhere obvious. Even
some of his followers (Mehring, for instance) recognized this. And
it is not difficult to describe his ideology. He was a bourgeois radical
who had broken away from bourgeois radicalism. He was formed by
German philosophy and did not feel himself to be a professional
economist until the end of the 1840's. But by that time, that is to say,
before his serious analytic work had begun, his vision of the capitalist
process had become set and his scientific work was to implement, not
to correct it. It was not original with him. It pervaded the radical
circles of Paris and may be traced back to a number of 18th century
writers, such as Linguet. History conceived as the struggle between
classes that are defined as haves and havenots, with exploitation of the
one by the other, ever increasing wealth among ever fewer haves and
ever increasing misery and degradation among the havenots, moving
with inexorable necessity toward spectacular explosion, this was the
vision then conceived with passionate energy and to be worked up,
like a raw material is being worked up, by means of the scientific
tools of his time. This vision implies a number of statements that will
* See especially S. N. H. Linguet, La théorie des Lois Civiles (1767), and Marx's
comments on him in Volume I, pp. 77 et seq. of the Theorien über den Mehrwert.