pared to accept as evidence selected corollaries of a general theory. The
doctrine of nonintervention was powerful only so long and so far as
men wished to obey.
II
There was no day on which economists ceased to commend reduc-
tions in the government's role in economic life and began to propose its
expansion. The limitation of hours of work for children was supported
well before the attack on the corn laws reached its climax. The statutes
liberalizing dealings in property in the 1830's followed at a distance the
regulation of passenger ships to protect emigrants.
How else could it be? The distinction between ancient police func-
tions admitted by all and new regulatory functions proposed by some
was most elusive. The same economist could and did repel the state
with one hand and beckon it with the other.14
The expansion of public control over economic life which took place
in the mid-nineteenth century in England, and a trifle later in the
United States, was usually of this sort: a traditional state function was
expanded or a new function was adopted which had close analogies to
traditional functions. Economic effects were usually incidental to pro-
tective effects: the inspection of factories and mines, the sanitation
laws for cities, the embryonic educational system, and most of the con-
trols over railroads were of this sort [9] [4].
One thing did not change at all, however, from the heyday of laissez
faire: no economist deemed it necessary to document his belief that the
state could effectively discharge the new duties he proposed to give to
it. The previous assertions of governmental incompetence were met
only by counter assertion; the previous hopes of wiser uses of govern-
mental powers by a democracy were deemed too prophetic to deserve.
the discourtesy of historical test. I shall illustrate this persistent neglect
of empirical evidence with the writings of two economists who have
almost nothing in common except great ability.
The first is Jevons. Governmental operation of an industry was ap-
propriate, Jevons believed, if four conditions were fulfilled: (1) The
work must be of an invariable and routine-like nature, so as to be per-
formed according to fixed rules. (2) It must be performed under the
public eye, or for the service of individuals, who will immediately de-
tect and expose any failure or laxity. (3) There must be very little
capital expenditure, so that each year's revenue and expense account


#### Split:
14 Thus McCulloch said of the post office: "It does not seem, though the contrary has
been sometimes contended, that the Postoffice could be so well conducted by anyone
else as by government: the latter alone can enforce perfect regularity in all its subordinate
departments . ." (Dictionary of Commerce (1854 ed.), article on "Postage").