low average income, the secular level of income in the lower brackets
could not be below a fairly sizable proportion of average incomeotherwise,
the groups could not survive. This means, to use a purely
hypothetical figure, that the secular level of the share of the lowest
decile could not fall far short of 6 or 7 per cent, i.e., the lowest decile
could not have a per capita income less than six- or seven-tenths of the
countrywide average. In more advanced countries, with higher average
per capita incomes, even the secular share of the lowest bracket could
easily be a smaller fraction of the countrywide average, say as small as
2 or 3 per cent for the lowest decile, i.e., from a fifth to a third of the
countrywide average-without implying a materially impossible economic
position for that group. To be sure, there is in all countries continuous
pressure to raise the relative position of the bottom-income
groups; but the fact remains that the lower limit of the proportional
share in the secular income structure is higher when the real countrywide
per capita income is low than when it is high.
If the long-term share of the lower-income groups is larger in the
underdeveloped than in the average countries, income inequality in the
former should be narrower, not wider as we have found. However, if
the lower brackets receive larger shares, and at the same time the very
top brackets also receive larger shares-which would mean that the
intermediate income classes would not show as great a progression from
the bottom-the net effect may well be wider inequality. To illustrate,
let us compare the distributions for India and the United States. The
first quintile in India receives 8 per cent of total income, more than the 6
per cent share of the first quintile in the United States. But the second
quintile in India receives only 9 per cent, the third 11, and the fourth
16; whereas in the United States, the shares of these quintiles are 12,
16, and 22 respectively. This is a rough statistical reflection of a fairly
common observation relating to income distributions in underdeveloped
compared with developed countries. The former have no "middle"
classes: there is a sharp contrast between the preponderant proportion
of population whose average income is well below the generally low
countrywide average, and a small top group with a very large relative
income excess. The developed countries, on the other hand, are characterized
by a much more gradual rise from low to high shares, with substantial
groups receiving more than the high countrywide income
average, and the top groups securing smaller shares than the comparable
ordinal groups in underdeveloped countries.
It is, therefore, possible that even the distributions of secular income
levels would be more unequal in underdeveloped than in developed
countries not in the sense that the shares of the lower brackets would
be lower in the former than in the latter, but in the sense that the shares