8
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
assume that government activity universally affords release to the
energies and aspirations of economic men. As a matter of fact, private
aggregation and public control both lead to frustration of some of the
basic economic urges of the individual as well as to gratification of
others. It is the thesis of this paper, however, that nongovernmental
organization for multilateral group bargaining presents, in the long run
and over the major part of the economic field, the truest and fullest
opportunity for universal self-expression combined with technical effi-
ciency.
Before examining the positive case, let us consider briefly two major
shortcomings of government as an agency for ordering our economic
lives.
III
Those who regard the drift toward governmental determination of
economic issues as not only an inevitable but also a fortunate develop-
ment are prone to think of this as the only "scientific" method of
ordering the economic affairs of a people. For who can know and seek
steadfastly "the common good" except the national government that,
by its very nature, rises above all class or sectional rivalries and can
compute the common multiple of the multifarious aspirations of all
its citizens?
This, however, is a superficial view. The analogy of the common
multiple is seriously misleading. In arithmetic, a common multiple com-
pletely and precisely embraces all the constituent factors, and these
factors are determined, exact, unchanging, and consistent. But the
interests of a nation's citizens are undetermined, vague, changing, and
often mutually inconsistent. In any strict sense they are largely un-
known even to the parties and, hence, unknowable by any central ad-
ministrative agency. They have to be discovered or registered in the
very process of adjustment to real and ever-changing local conditions.
In their final terms they must represent compromises, interarticular
adjustments, and new subjective values that emerge from the very
process of making particular decisions for action as the parties at
interest are confronted by changing situations.
When government attempts to deal with these complex, varied, and
changing situations it does so through either the legislator or the ad-
ministrative official. Our legislative process is, of course, a succession
of compromises among individuals and rival interests and thus may
seem to conform to my criterion of a sound procedure for settling eco-
nomic issues. But the compromises made in Congress are in the nature
of political trades and log-rolling deals involving many extraneous is-
sues rather than being specific business transactions in which func-
