Since ghosts are hardy creatures, the laying of this one will probably
not constitute a once-and-for-all execution. We shall probably see him
again thumbing his nose at us in the next textbook or in the next issue
of one of our journals.

Imperfect Information and the Question of "Satisficing" Behavior
The same confusion sometimes encumbers the discussions about the
alleged "imperfection" of knowledge available to firms for their rational
decision-making [39, pp. xxiv-xxvi, 40-41, 81-83, 241-42] and the
screens and blockages in "the flow of information through the hierarchies
of the organization" [27, pp. 228-29]. But what can be "imperfect”
about the information on, say, a tax increase? Why should it
take special theories of bureaucracy to explain how the news of a wage
increase "flows" through various hierarchical levels up or down or
across? Yet this, and this alone, is the information that is essentially
involved in the theory of prices and allocation, since it is the adjustment
to such changes in conditions for which the postulate of maximizing
behavior is employed.

One can understand, of course, how the confusion arose. The proponents
of managerial analysis have the creditable ambition to reorganize
firms in such a way that their managements can really, as a matter
of actual fact, maximize the results of their performance, not only in
adjusting to changes in conditions, but also in making the most rational
arrangements on the basis of the complete environment in which
they operate. Incidentally, not only "normative micro-economics," as
management science has been called [40, p. 279], has this ambition;
many propositions of welfare economics are also based on such presuppositions.


14

As a matter of fact, the interesting distinction made between
"satisficing" and "maximizing” or “optimizing" behavior [39, pp. xxivxxvi]
[40, pp. 262-65] had its origin in precisely the same issue;
management, realizing the complexity of the calculations and the imperfection
of the data that would have to be employed in any determination
of "optimal" decisions, cannot help being satisfied with something
less: its behavior will be only “satisficing." What behavior? The
mere adjustment to a simple change or the coordinated, integrated
whole of its activities? Evidently, only the latter is the overly ambitious


#### Split:

14 "Economic man deals with the 'real world' in all its complexity," says Herbert Simon
[39, p. xxv]. The homo oeconomicus I have encountered in the literature was not such a
perfectionist. Incidentally, even Simon's "economic man," two years before the ambitious
one just quoted, did not have "absolutely complete," but only “impressively clear and
voluminous" knowledge of the "relevant aspects of his environment" [38, p. 99]. My
point is that we ought to distinguish perfect or imperfect knowledge of (a) the entire
environment, (b) the relevant aspects of the entire environment, (c) the relevant changes
in environmental conditions.
