and the Price Level presented some work that amounted to partial
implementation of the idea of abortive saving. But with Keynes this
idea remained a side issue even in the Treatise on Money. Perhaps
it was the shock imparted by the world crisis which definitely broke
the bonds that prevented him from fully verbalizing himself. Certainly
it was the shock imparted by the world crisis which created the public
for a message of this kind.

Again it was the ideology-the vision of decaying capitalism that
located (saw) the cause of the decay in one out of a large number of
features of latter-day society-which appealed and won the day,
and not the analytic implementation by the book of 1936 which, by
itself and without the protection it found in the wide appeal of the
ideology, would have suffered much more from the criticisms that were
directed against it almost at once. Still, the conceptual apparatus was
the work not only of a brilliant but also of a mature mind-of
a Marshallian who was one of the three men who had shared the sage's
mantle between them. Throughout the 1920's Keynes was and felt
himself to be a Marshallian and even though he later on renounced
his allegiance dramatically, he never deviated from the Marshallian
line more than was strictly necessary in order to make his point.
He continued to be what he had become by 1914, a master of the
theorist's craft, and he was thus able to provide his vision with an
armour that prevented many of his followers from seeing the ideological
element at all. Of course this now expedites the absorption of
Keynes' contribution into the current stream of analytic work. There
are no really new principles to absorb. The ideology of underemployment
equilibrium and of non-spending-which is a better term to
use than saving—is readily seen to be embodied in a few restrictive
assumptions that emphasize certain (real or supposed) facts. With these
everyone can deal as he thinks fit and for the rest he can continue his
way. This reduces Keynesian controversies to the level of technical
science. Lacking institutional support, the “creed" has petered out
with the situation that had made it convincing. Even the most stalwart
McCullochs of our day are bound to drift into one of those positions
of which it is hard to say whether they involve renunciation, reinterpretation,
or misunderstanding of the original message.

V

Our examples might suggest that analytically uncontrolled ideas
play their role exclusively in the realm of those broad conceptions of
the economic process as a whole that constitute the background from
which analytic effort sets out and of which we never succeed in fully
mastering more than segments. This is of course true to some extent―