2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
are concerned with our own country, backward areas, or the entire
world. Nowadays, indeed, “raising the standard of living" is increas-
ingly urged as the basic objective of high policy, national and inter-
national.
In our highly dynamic world it is not enough for social scientists
to provide an orderly description of life as it is and to analyze social
forces as they currently operate. We are necessarily concerned with the
evolution of the social economy-local, national, and world—and with
the results of experiments, by whatever name they are called, that affect
this evolution. We cannot be content with describing and measuring
what are variously called standards of living, and with analyzing the
ways in which they change. We must also be concerned with aspects
of the problems involved in raising or otherwise improving them.
But what does "the standard of living" mean? Is it what is actually
experienced? Or what is worked for, or hoped for, or merely dreamed
of? Is its central feature total or average income, or consumption ex-
penditures unadjusted or adjusted for price changes? Do possessions
as well as fresh acquisitions enter into it? Is it simply “real consump-
tion," or does it include other components such as savings, hours of
labor, and literacy? Do freedoms of various kinds figure in it? Is it
concerned with "input" or with “outcome," with utilization or with net
results in health, efficiency, and satisfactions? Is it something charac-
teristic of the individual or group concerned, or something devised from
the outside? Does it include components that cannot be measured?
Merely to ask these questions is to reveal the prevalent confusion
of thought. In professional groups, in banking, business, and official
circles, and by the man in the street, "standard of living" is used in
all of these senses and others. Even among economists and statesmen, it
currently means several quite different things. For each of these a
distinctive phrase with a fairly definite meaning must be employed if
serious errors are to be avoided. It is high time to reform our careless
habits of talking about "standards of living."
Basic Concepts
The chief distinctions to be drawn are between consumption and
living, and between level and standard. The basic concepts are four:
(1) consumption level, (2) consumption standard, (3) level or plane
of living, and (4) standard of living in the strict sense. The relation-
ships among these several realities are highly significant. Nothing is
gained, and much is lost, by the indiscriminate use of a single phrase
for these four different concepts and others besides.
Consumption means the commodities, their uses, and services con-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:56:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
