successful national wage policy. It may be expected that labor leader-
ship will pronounce in favor of increased government expenditures
and of tax reduction concentrating on the lower income brackets,
though how much effect this has on the voting tendencies of the rank
and file it is difficult to say. Bearing these considerations in mind it is
perhaps fair to say that organized labor's role with respect to stabili-
zation and growth policy is apt to be passive rather than active. It
can obstruct certain courses of action; it can support others; but it
is unlikely to initiate.
How does this melange of special interests, conflicting ideologies,
and ignorance affect the prospects for stabilization and growth in the
United States and the choice of means thereto? The influence of what,
for want of a better word, I shall call institutional considerations
seems to me large; larger than is sometimes assumed by our “aggrega-
tive" colleagues. They not only help to explain differences in the re-
sponse in different economies to objectively similar stimuli but in a
particular economy bring about changes over time in the relationship
of various magnitudes that make the life of forecasters and policy
planners difficult. More important, these considerations tend, at any
particular time, to set definite limits to what it is desirable or feasible
to attempt in the direction of stabilization policy.
The French approach to stabilization and growth, or even the
Dutch, both of which, at least superficially, seem eminently successful
in their own environment, have very little relevance for U.S. condi-
tions. To begin with, it would have to be recognized that it is impos-
sible to determine to what extent the recent growth rate in France
is to be attributed to so-called “indicative" planning. Growth rates
in Germany and Italy have been at least as striking without the bene-
fit of anything that could properly be called planning. Indeed, the
German economy seems, in some respects, to be less "directed" than
our own. The projections of various economic magnitudes with which
we are so liberally supplied by the Council of Economic Advisers and
other agencies are almost completely lacking there. In France numer-
ous other influences, in addition to planning, may have a bearing on
stabilization and growth. One could mention the monetary reforms of
1958; the current and anticipatory effects of the Common Market;
the opportunities for technological advance offered by postwar recon-
struction and capital replacement; the development, with higher per
capita incomes, of economic activities in which scale economies are
important; the continued existence of bottlenecks providing lucrative
investment opportunities; and, no doubt, many others. Indeed, as one
regards the metamorphosis of the French entrepreneur, within a rela-
tively few years, from the traditional "lazy man of Europe" into his