or proper place in the organization and its use to describe the free
choice by each of his cooperators is a linguistic accident calamitous for
understanding. All "personal" association, by contrast, involves power,
and personal values are not subject to exchange. The form of purchase
and sale of friendliness or enmity is viewed as immoral, though there is
much pretense both ways—as in most human relations. Exchange or its
terms may be much influenced by personal considerations (really mixed
with giving) and we actually in large measure exchange dinner-parties,
various presents, etc., as well as disfavors. (One reason why a science
of human behavior, in the literal sense, is impossible is that, in con-
trast with physical objects, our behavior is so saturated with varied
make-believe and deception, not clearly separable from the "realities.")
A special and very important form of exchange occurs when one person
places his economic capacity under the direction of another, on terms
fixed by agreement-the principle of "entrepreneurship." Such direc-
tion is a distinctive service in that it cannot be measured until after
the arrangement is liquidated, hence cannot be treated as a means-of-
production or "capitalized" as can be done with other services, includ-
ing the personal type, as far as contracts can be enforced.
The "perfect" market (mis-called perfectly competitive) is unreal
but conceptually necessary. It is the embodiment of complete freedom.
There are no power relations, since everyone has a choice among a
number of equally good alternatives. The freedom in question centers
in the right of each to be the judge of his own values and of the use of
his own means to achieve them. There is no implication of selfishness
or any other judgment of the moral quality or artistic taste reflected in
any want or act. We usually speak of "individual” freedom, but it
applies to any group acting as a unit. The family, “represented” by its
"head," is the usual minimum unit, and there are other units in un-
limited number and variety. Wants and resources are treated simply as
"given" attributes of any individual or other unit; “technology” must
either be included among resources or added as a third given-the
latter the more useful procedure. On the average, an economic subject's
own person, with all its capacities, is the chief means under his control
and is in the majority of cases nearly his only resource. Differences be-
tween personal capacities and external “property” are the creation of
the legal system, and would be absent under a slave economy. The
virtual outlawing of enforcible contracts for personal services creates
a serious disadvantage for one whose resources are in the personal
form; for he cannot freely "realize" future value by sale or pledge
and is consequently dependent on a continuous market as well as
continuity in the capacity itself. But the benefits of freedom are pre-
sumably thought greater than the evil.