balances higher than people desire, it will tend initially to lower interest
rates and in this and other ways to stimulate spending. Income and
spending will start to rise.

To begin with, much or most of the rise in income will take the form
of an increase in output and employment rather than in prices. People
have been expecting prices to be stable, and prices and wages have been
set for some time in the future on that basis. It takes time for people to
adjust to a new state of demand. Producers will tend to react to the
initial expansion in aggregate demand by increasing output, employees
by working longer hours, and the unemployed, by taking jobs now offered
at former nominal wages. This much is pretty standard doctrine.
But it describes only the initial effects. Because selling prices of
products typically respond to an unanticipated rise in nominal demand
faster than prices of factors of production, real wages received have
gone down though real wages anticipated by employees went up, since
employees implicitly evaluated the wages offered at the earlier price
level. Indeed, the simultaneous fall ex post in real wages to employers
and rise ex ante in real wages to employees is what enabled employment
to increase. But the decline ex post in real wages will soon come
to affect anticipations. Employees will start to reckon on rising prices
of the things they buy and to demand higher nominal wages for the future.
"Market" unemployment is below the "natural" level. There is an
excess demand for labor so real wages will tend to rise toward their initial
level.

Even though the higher rate of monetary growth continues, the rise
in real wages will reverse the decline in unemployment, and then lead
to a rise, which will tend to return unemployment to its former level. In
order to keep unemployment at its target level of 3 per cent, the monetary
authority would have to raise monetary growth still more. As in
the interest rate case, the "market” rate can be kept below the "natural"
rate only by inflation. And, as in the interest rate case, too, only by
accelerating inflation. Conversely, let the monetary authority choose a
target rate of unemployment that is above the natural rate, and they will
be led to produce a deflation, and an accelerating deflation at that.
What if the monetary authority chose the "natural" rate-either of
interest or unemployment-as its target? One problem is that it cannot
know what the “natural” rate is. Unfortunately, we have as yet devised
no method to estimate accurately and readily the natural rate of
either interest or unemployment. And the "natural" rate will itself
change from time to time. But the basic problem is that even if the
monetary authority knew the “natural” rate, and attempted to peg the
market rate at that level, it would not be led to a determinate policy.
The "market" rate will vary from the natural rate for all sorts of reasons
other than monetary policy. If the monetary authority responds to