There is another factor involved. One of the reasons for the lower
rate of growth of the trade of the less developed countries is surely
that practically all of them pursue highly protectionist policies. In my
opinion, they are going in their protectionism far beyond what can pos-
sibly be justified on infant-industry, terms-of-trade, or any other ra-
tional grounds. But whether one accepts this judgment or not, high pro-
tection reduces the volume of trade¹ and by the same token increases
the marginal benefit from trade.
As for the terms of trade, the deterioration from the early 1950's is,
of course, regrettable in the sense that the less developed countries
would be better off if in 1960 their terms of trade were the same as in
1950. But we must keep a sense of proportion. The deterioration was
not catastrophic and cannot be compared with what happened in the
1930's. The comparative order of magnitude is indicated by the fact
that while, according to the U.N., from 1950 to 1960 the deterioration.
was 9 per cent, Kindleberger found that in 1938 the terms of trade of
industrial Europe with a large part of the underdeveloped world stood
at 149, with 1928 = 100 [22] [6] .20 To convey an idea of the absolute
magnitude of the "burden" or "loss" involved, let me mention that the
U.N. report computes that "had the terms of trade of the less developed
countries been stabilized at their 1950 level the aggregate purchasing
power of their exports in terms of imports in 1960 would have been
greater to the extent of $2.3 billion." This is not a negligible sum, but
compared with the national income of the less developed areas of the
fact. See also D. H. Robertson [16]. It should be observed, however, that freer trade be-
tween the industrial countries, although it may be less valuable than trade between industrial
and tropical countries on comparative cost grounds, can be beneficial through stimulating
competition and counteracting monopolistic tendencies. This effect of free trade has been
stressed by J. S. Mill and reiterated by modern theorists of integration, e.g., by Tibor
Scitovsky and Harry Johnson.
19 In underdeveloped countries the theory has been widely accepted that in less developed
countries import restrictions do not reduce the volume of imports or exports; they merely
cause a shift of imports from, say, luxury goods to capital goods. In the developed industrial
countries, it is said, the classical rule still applies that import restrictions reduce the volume
of trade in both directions. This is the official doctrine of the U.N. Economic Commission
for Latin America (ECLA). See, e.g., [23, esp. p. 61]. The reason usually given is that these
countries spend all their export proceeds anyway. This, of course, overlooks that protection
draws factors of production into the protected industries from the export sector. Only under
extreme and entirely unrealistic assumptions concerning the existence of large masses of
disguised unemployment (including that of skilled workers), of surplus capacity, and very
elastic capital supply could the conclusion be overthrown that export supply will contract as
a consequence of massive import substitution brought about by heavy protection.
20
'Kindleberger's figures are not quite comparable with the U.N. figures because his area
breakdown is a different one. The figure quoted in the text refers to industrial Europe's terms
of trade with "all other areas," i.e., the world excluding the rest of Europe, the United States,
and the "countries of recent settlement." With the last-mentioned area the index of industrial
Europe's terms of trade stood at 138 in 1938 (1928 = 100).