KUZNETS: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INCOME INEQUALITY 17
for by the factors discussed. Specifically, the shares of the lower income
groups in sectors A and/or B must have increased sufficiently to offset
the decline that would otherwise have been produced by a combination
of the elements shown in the numerical illustration.
This narrowing in inequality, the offsetting rise in the shares of the
lower brackets, most likely occurred in the income distribution for the
urban groups, in sector B. While it may also have been present in sector
A, it would have had a more limited effect on the inequality in the coun-
trywide income distribution because of the rapidly diminishing weight
of sector A in the total. Nor was such a narrowing of income inequality
in agriculture likely: with industrialization, a higher level of technology
permitted larger-scale units and, in the United States for example,
sharpened the contrast between the large and successful business
farmers and the subsistence sharecroppers of the South. Furthermore,
since we accept the assumption of initially narrower inequality in the
internal distribution of income in sector A than in sector B, any signifi-
cant reduction in inequality in the former is less likely than in the latter.
Hence we may conclude that the major offset to the widening of in-
come inequality associated with the shift from agriculture and the
countryside to industry and the city must have been a rise in the income
share of the lower groups within the nonagricultural sector of the
population. This provides a lead for exploration in what seems to me
a most promising direction: consideration of the pace and character of
the economic growth of the urban population, with particular reference
to the relative position of lower-income groups. Much is to be said for
the notion that once the early turbulent phases of industrialization and
urbanization had passed, a variety of forces converged to bolster the
economic position of the lower-income groups within the urban popula-
tion. The very fact that after a while, an increasing proportion of the
urban population was "native," i.e., born in cities rather than in the
rural areas, and hence more able to take advantage of the possibilities
of city life in preparation for the economic struggle, meant a better
chance for organization and adaptation, a better basis for securing
greater income shares than was possible for the newly “immigrant"
population coming from the countryside or from abroad. The increas-
ing efficiency of the older, established urban population should also be
taken into account. Furthermore, in democratic societies the growing
political power of the urban lower-income groups led to a variety of
protective and supporting legislation, much of it aimed to counteract
the worst effects of rapid industrialization and urbanization and to
support the claims of the broad masses for more adequate shares of the
growing income of the country. Space does not permit the discussion of
demographic, political, and social considerations that could be brought
