gifts, employment, sales, and-most important of all-on the incomes
of both corporations and individuals. Fifty years ago customs duties
still yielded about half of the total revenue of the federal government,
and none of our governmental units as yet collected any tax on incomes.
Twenty years later, personal and corporate income taxes were already
the mainstay of federal finance. Subsequently, the activities of the federal
government increased much faster than local activities and taxes
followed suit. By 1957 the income tax accounted for nearly 70 per cent
of federal revenue, 8 per cent of state and local revenue, and a little
over half of the combined revenue of our various governmental units.
This dominance of the income tax in current governmental finance,
together with the recent shift of tax collection toward a pay-as-you-go
basis, has measurably enlarged the government's participation in the
shifting fortunes of the private economy. During the nineteenth century,
taxes were not only a much smaller factor in the economy, but
such short-run elasticity as there was in tax revenues derived almost
entirely from customs duties. Hence, when production fell off and private
incomes diminished, the accompanying change in governmental
revenues was usually small. In recent years, however, governmental
revenues have become very sensitive to fluctuations of business conditions.
When corporate profits decline by, say, a billion dollars, the federal
government will collect under existing law about a half billion less
from corporations. When individual incomes decline by a billion, the
federal government may be expected to collect about $150 million less
from individuals. State income taxes accentuate these effects. In short,
when a recession occurs, our current tax system requires the government
to reduce rather promptly and substantially the amount of money
that it withdraws from the private economy for its own use. The result
is that the income from production which corporations and individuals
have at their disposal declines much less than does the national income.
Moreover, the operations of government are now so organized that
the flow of personal income from production is bolstered during a recession
by increased payments of unemployment insurance benefits. Unemployment
insurance was established on a national basis in 1935, and
the protection of workers against the hazards of unemployment has
increased since then. Not all employees are as yet covered by unemployment
insurance and the benefits, besides, are often inadequate
to provide for essentials. Nevertheless, there has been a gradual improvement
in the ability of families to get along decently even when the
main breadwinner is temporarily unemployed. At present, over 80 per
cent of those who work for a wage or salary are covered by unemployment
insurance, in contrast to 70 per cent in 1940. The period over