1947]
GOLDEN WEISER: THE ECONOMIST AND THE STATE
of the two leading political parties. The position of Congressmen on
vital issues, however, is not determined by their party allegiance. The
economic views of progressive Democrats, for example, are much farther
removed from those of conservative Democrats than those of individual
progressives or conservatives of either party are from each other. This
is so well known that it is almost a platitude. And yet, at the risk of
platitudinousness, it needs to be restated because of less obvious im-
plications. For this means that in choosing a member of Congress the
voter has no assurance that the party designation of his candidate in-
sures his taking certain positions, even on vital issues. Unless the voter
knows the views of a candidate on a variety of problems, he votes in the
dark. Some system under which the platform on which a party is elected
to office will indicate the line of policy that its individual members are
pledged to carry out is an essential part of a rational and effective de-
mocracy. We have no such system. It is imperative that one be estab-
lished. With such a system in effect, pressure groups representing special
interests would have considerably less opportunity to influence legisla-
tive action.
In the course of time terms of office of Congressmen should be so
modified as to make impossible the frustration and stalling of govern-
ment that occurs when the majority of Congress belongs to a different
party from that of the executive. This, however, would require an
amendment to the constitution and would be a slow process. The ur-
gency of such an improvement in legislative machinery is obscured by
the lack of likemindedness within the parties. It is significant and hope-
ful, on the other hand, that many of the other changes most urgently
required for rationalizing government can be accomplished not only
within the existing terms of the constitution but for the most part even
without legislation-by the adoption of effective practices and the es-
tablishment of a tradition of responsibility in government.
Recent improvements in the internal organization of Congress under
the La Follette bill are important steps in the right direction and hold a
promise of better functioning of the legislature. But in order to serve
the purposes of democracy adequate means must be devised to make
Congress a more effective instrument for carrying out the will of the
electorate. A machinery of government under which the President and
members of Congress, who were elected at the same time on the same
platform and have the same party allegiance and the same mandate
from the people, cannot coöperate on major issues is one that frustrates
the democratic process.
Coördinate with Congress stands the executive, with powers derived
in part from Congress and in part directly from the constitution. To
function effectively it must have organized machinery for coöperation
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:58:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
