THE DECLINE IN THE EFFICIENCY OF INSTRUMENTS
ESSENTIAL IN EQUILIBRIUM¹
Note: The untimely death of Professor Harold A. Innis on November 8, 1952 deprived
this Association of the presidential address that he was to have delivered at the December
1952 meetings-an address which all acquainted with him or his work knew would be
not only humorous and filled with incisive comments but intensely thought-provoking.
However, we do have a preliminary draft of the first portion of his intended address. It
should be remembered that the portion printed here was written when he was extremely
weak and often in much pain. No doubt it would have been extensively revised and more
closely knit together had he survived to complete it. This fragment, though very typical
of the author, is essentially introductory in character. It barely reaches the point where
he begins to develop his real subject and does not make clear the main thesis he had
intended to expound. Fortunately, however, during the summer, he had discussed his
proposed address at considerable length with his oldest son, Donald Innis, who has kindly
prepared the brief summary included here, covering the main points which his father had
intended to develop.
CHESTER W. WRIGHT
When my friend Bob Coats as federal statistician became president
of the American Statistical Association under circumstances similar to
my own in relation to this Association, he compared himself to James
VI of Scotland who became, as you remember, James I of England;
and he drew interesting parallels between the interventions from the
north to the south in the two cases. I am too aware of the ultimate fate
of the Stuarts, in particular of Charles I, the son of James, to wish to
press this comparison further. But I must begin this paper with remarks
which may be helpful to you in explaining its contents. A social scientist
in Canada can only survive by virtue of a sense of humor. (Stephen
Leacock was a logical result.) He can scarcely fail to be amused by the
goings on in this country and by the antics of Great Britain, or fail to be
disturbed by a realization that he can do nothing about it. Occasionally
he is described in after-dinner speeches as an interpreter between the
two countries as though anyone could interpret for individuals who
betray such unmistakable evidence of lunacy. In a sense, perhaps, a
realization that he lives in such a large insane asylum may be an indi-
cation of sanity, but it is unavoidable that he should have serious
doubts about his own sanity. My old friend the late Professor Robert
McQueen used to write from Winnipeg, half in earnest half in jest,
“I'm depressed and fear I'm becoming known as a luncheon speaker.
Can't you do something to get me an honest job?” For these reasons the
1 Alternative titles on the manuscript are: "The Bias of Economics" and "The Menace
of Absolutism in Time."
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
