WITTE: ECONOMICS AND PUBLIC POLICY
11
proportionately to all industrial employees. Other technically trained
personnel are also in excess demand, but managerial talent is most neces-
sary of all and most difficult to develop. Both management and technol-
ogy have been suggested to be basic factors in the economy on a par with
the traditional land, labor, and capital. While not completely neglected,
they have been assigned far too little importance by economists in
explaining our productive accomplishments and possibilities and in
considerations of economic growth and development on international
levels.
III
John Williams in his presidential address in 195110 raised the question
whether the thinking of economists leads and directs or merely follows
changes in the environment. He concluded that most economic literature
is a rationalization after the event. Pursuing his thought, it seems to
me that at present, economists are doing but little leading in the domain
of public policy. Further they have taken into account only very in-
adequately the many basic changes in the economy which have been
occurring so rapidly in recent decades.
Twenty years ago an answer satisfying to many economists was given
in Keynes' General Theory to the most pressing public policy question
of the day, that of how to get out of the depression. With the changes
in the environment since then, new questions have arisen and Keynesian
economics seems less of a satisfying answer to all basic questions, al-
though it is still very influential. Neoclassical economics probably has
more followers than earlier, but gives few answers to current public
policy questions. Institutional economics has regained some popularity
after years of neglect and ridicule. But, to me, institutional economics
seems more of a method of approach to public policy questions than an
over-all economic theory.
While a majority will differ, it is my thought that the approach of the
institutional economists has much to commend it. On another occasion,
I described this approach as "a practical problems approach," with
emphasis upon finding answers to the many new economic problems of
the day." John Williams-who, I suspect, would object to any identi-
fication with the institutional economists-expressed my thought in the
statement that "economic theorizing. . . [is] pointless unless it is aimed
at what to do," and further that the "pretension to universality . . . is
the inescapable bane on theorizing.'
."
12 I do not imply that others than
institutional economists have not concerned themselves with practical
10 "An Economist's Confessions," Am. Econ. Rev., March 1952, XLII, 1-24.
11 "Institutional Economics as Seen by an Institutional Economist," So. Econ. Jour., Oct.
1954, XXI, 131-40.
12 Op. cit., p. 10.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:14:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
