there is no fixed amount of investment opportunity, no fixed willingness
to take chances, no fixed demand for goods or for people to make goods.
All depend upon conditions, and all may be greatly influenced by
policy.

Some of the policies which determine the volume of employment
represent a deliberate choice between employment and something else.
There may be a clash, for example, between the interest of the community
in full employment and its preference concerning the distribution
of wealth. Since tax changes which would raise the marginal return
on investments by the well-to-do would facilitate the acquisition
of large fortunes, the community may accept a limited amount of
private employment in order to achieve a more even distribution of
wealth.28 The policies which represent a deliberate and informed choice
between employment and something else are not our problem. Many of
the policies which affect employment, however, are not intended to do
so. The groups which produce the policies are too small to consider their
consequences for employment and yet the total effect of the policies
of thousands of organizations of business men and farmers, thousands
of local unions, and many states, counties, and cities upon cost-price
relationships and upon the opportunity to experiment and to introduce
innovations is considerable.

Because many policies are pursued without regard to their effect
upon the general level of employment, the persistence of unemployment
cannot be counted upon to produce the changes in policies which are
needed to increase employment. If the bargaining power of labor, for
example, is too great in relation to the rate of technological discovery
so that the investment function does not permit a satisfactory level of
employment, there is no automatic change in policies to reduce the
bargaining power of labor, to raise the rate of discovery, or to produce
a shift in the propensity to save. These things may happen, but they
cannot be counted upon to happen. In fact, the response of policies to
unemployment may in the main be bad: unemployment may provoke a
flood of attempts to protect markets by restrictions which narrow the
area of innovation, cut the marginal return on investments, and produce
unfavorable shifts in the schedule of liquidity preference. Numerous
examples of this kind of response to unemployment can be gathered
from the recent depression both in the United States and abroad.29




#### Split:

28 One of the broadest conflicts in the community is the competition between the old
and the new. Much intervention on behalf of the government is simply a way of
protecting the old from the competition of the new. Of course, the farther the
government goes in protecting the old from the new, the more it limits investment
opportunity and, to that extent, employment. But most of the community may prefer
less private employment to a faster rate of change.
29 The most conspicuous illustrations can be drawn from the field of international
economic policy, but many others could be cited.
