ment was greatly increasing the difficulty of adding to one's capital by
successful ventures and at the same time was severely limiting the possi-
bility of charging unsuccessful ventures against successful ones. Can
one imagine a better arrangement for encouraging investors to avoid
venturesome commitments?
VI
What of the long-range outlook? If to shifts in economic and political
power, which have already created difficult problems, is added a nar-
rowed opportunity for extensive investment, does not the problem of
providing employment become so formidable as to require great changes
in policies and institutions?
One may assert with reasonable confidence, I think, that the con-
sumption function will slowly become more favorable to employment.
For more than a generation the propensity to consume has been rising
just about fast enough to prevent the increase in per capita incomes
from causing a drop in the proportion of the national income currently
consumed. It is noteworthy, however, that in the twenties, despite the
rapid rise in per capita income, capital formation was relatively less
than in the preceding decade-19.6 per cent of gross product as against
22.8 per cent. In the post-war world, the propensity to consume will
be higher than in the twenties. Corporations will be hampered, as they
have been for nearly a decade, in devoting part of their income to capital
11


#### Split:
per cent as a loss. The act of 1932 greatly restricted the deduction of short-term losses and
the act of 1934 restricted the deductions of all capital losses to the amount of capital gains
plus $2,000.
Mr. Alexander Sachs stresses the deterring effects in the act of 1938 of the disconnection
between long-term and short-term gains and losses. If a long-term gain and a short-term
loss are realized in the same year, the latter cannot be used to offset the former. Furthermore,
if the short-term gain is not realized, the enterpriser is exposed to the danger that, in the
event of the gain's becoming a loss, it can be credited only to the extent of 15 per cent or
20 per cent.
"S. S. Kuznets, "Capital Formation, 1879-1938," University of Pennsylvania Bicentennial
Conference, p. 70.
The real rise in the individual propensity to consume was considerably more than is
indicated by the figures of gross capital formation. The change in individual propensities
to consume cannot be inferred entirely from the proportion of output devoted to capital
formation. In the twenties a considerable increase in public capital formation (roads and
bridges) was financed by new taxes such as gasoline taxes. Such capital formation, of
course, represents no increased disposition on the part of individuals to save. It may be
thought that the proportion of income devoted to consumption was abnormally high in
the twenties because of the making of purchases postponed during the war and the
liquidation of Liberty Bonds for that purpose. This may have been true for the first
several years of the decade. But annual figures on capital formation indicate that the pro-
portion of output devoted to capital formation tended to decline between 1923 and 1929,
despite a rise in per capita real income.
Capital formation by corporations was facilitated by the fact that managements were
not under pressure to restore previously high dividend rates and hence were fairly free to
plow back a large proportion of increased earnings.