In the one cross-section study which was carried through for New
South Wales, the differences were greater, amounting to between 3
and 4 standard errors of estimate. In the case of Canada, however, the
average degree of agreement was very close. The average value of k
for the four years was .47, and similarly,

k

k + j

was .47; while the

average ratio of W/P was .48. This is an almost precise agreement.
This agreement was also true of the years 1923 and 1927 when they
are considered individually. The years 1935 and 1937, however, exhibit
opposing tendencies. In the former year, k exceeded W/P by an appreciable
amount; in the latter year, which was marked by great wage
advances in the United States, which were reflected to some degree in
Canada, this situation was exactly reversed. The two differences, however,
almost precisely offset each other. The case of South Africa does,
however, merit special mention. As I have pointed out, Professor
Browne found that the combined exponents for black and white labor
in 1937-38 were .65, but he also found that both groups of labor received
only a total of .46 per cent of the net value added. While Professor
Browne does not draw such a conclusion, perhaps this is a case
where a highly monopolized set of industries which are largely run by
foreign employers or by men whose cultural interests are elsewhere, do
not give to the laborers that which in a competitive society they would
obtain.

VII. Summary

After working on this problem for the better part of twenty years,
I think I am aware of the many difficulties which are involved. In a
few cases, the method apparently breaks down and in other cases incongruous
results are obtained. I should like to suggest, however, that
the following tentative conclusions seem justified.
1. That within a given country for the periods studied, there is a
substantial and indeed a surprising degree of agreement in the values
of k and of j which we obtain for various years.

2. There is also a surprising degree of agreement between the results
for the United States, Australia, and South Africa.
3. It is hard to believe that these results can be purely accidental,
as some critics have maintained.30 Time studies for the period between




#### Split:

"It would be interesting to work out the mathematical possibility that these results are
purely accidental. I believe that it would only be one out of many millions. It is theoretically
possible, as Bertrand Russell has pointed out, that all the books in the British Museum
were written by monkeys pounding typewriters at random. But we know that they were
not!
