ing a great and diversified land area, the United States has developed
a rounded economy, marked by rapid technological progress, on a scale
never previously witnessed. It produces over 40 per cent of the world's
manufactures, but still relies predominantly on home supplies of food
and raw materials. Over the last hundred years, our imports have declined
from about 10 per cent to less than 5 per cent of our national
income, compared with percentages of 10 to 30 or higher for Western
European countries. Since the 1870's, the composition of our foreign
trade has undergone pronounced changes, with imports of manufactures
showing a large relative decline and exports of manufactures a large
increase (from about one-seventh of our exports to about one-half).
In the process, the share of Europe in our trade has undergone a
marked secular decline, and the pattern of our trade has shifted toward
the non-European world. Though the wars have undoubtedly accentuated
these changes, they were already apparent before 1914. They
raise a question whether Western Europe, if much more vigorous measures
toward increasing productivity are not taken (and it must be remembered
that increasing productivity is a race this country cannot
be expected to stand still), is not in danger of being pushed into a backwater.

Meanwhile a great change appears to be under way in the relation
of industrial production and trade to foods and raw materials. For
perhaps three-quarters of a century, the problem had been whether
the industrial countries could absorb the food and raw materials which
they had been instrumental in developing in other countries, on terms
of trade tolerable to the latter. Now the imbalance appears to be swinging
the other way. Owing partly to the expansion of industrial output
in Europe under the Marshall Plan, and even more to our own absorption
of raw materials (in the consumer durable goods industries as well
as in the capital goods industries), there is a general world problem of
availability of supplies. Again, this problem has been much accentuated
by the rearmament program; but it was becoming apparent even before
Korea. World industrial production since 1938 has grown by some 50
per cent, while the output of food and raw materials has at most increased
by 10 per cent. Some experts have estimated that, apart from
the United States, the world's food production is now lower than before
the war; and if we take out a few items, such as petroleum and aluminum,
this may well be true also of the raw materials.
This problem of the changing balance in production points up the
need, on the economic side, of an effective program for the underdeveloped
countries. It comes, however, at a time when sharply divergent
views are developed as to the purposes of international investment
(or grants). The less developed countries, with their recently won