8
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
with Congress. Experience has demonstrated that voluntary, irregular
contacts are not enough. A regular statutory line of authority between
the executive and the legislative arms of the government is needed.
The executive itself should be so organized as to be in a position to
initiate programs expressive of broad national policy, and when ap-
proved by Congress, to carry them out as a coördinated undertaking—
through the different parts into which the executive branch of the gov-
ernment is subdivided. As the government is constituted, there was
until recently no agency for formulating national policies, no provision
for regular consultation with the legislative power, and no machinery
for coördinating the activities of the ten regular departments and the
numerous independent agencies, boards and commissions. The only
place where the power of coördination is lodged under the existing sys-
tem is the White House. And as a consequence, too much responsibility,
too much detailed work, and too much omniscience is expected of one
man—the President, who, in order to discharge the superhuman duties
piled upon him, needs to be a paragon of physical endurance, of wisdom,
energy, tact, and showmanship, as well as of political strategy. The re-
sult is that Presidents are killed by overwork and yet can rarely achieve
a complete and continuous program of national policy.
For the President does not have the support of a Cabinet with joint
responsibility for national policy. Such a Cabinet does not exist in this
country. There is only a group of men, charged with specific duties in
separate fields, with the President alone as a unifying and reconciling
factor. The extent to which problems of national policy are discussed at
Cabinet meetings is not generally known. But that there is no recogni-
tion of joint responsibility for adopting policy is clear. It is also apparent
that there are jealousies and a constant jockeying for power. Further-
more, many of the most important functions of the Executive are en-
trusted to agencies not represented at the Cabinet table at all—and
subject to no control except by remote direction of Congress and infre-
quent contacts with the over-worked and necessarily inaccessible Chief
Executive. The course of government may be pictured as an obstacle
race beset by many hurdles and run simultaneously on many courses,
with but one judge who is under pressure to look in all directions at once
and to make prompt decisions of vital importance, without opportunity
in many instances to consider comprehensively all the elements in-
volved. This system is a heritage of a past era, when the duties of fed-
eral government were infinitely simpler. It needs to be remodeled in
order to be equipped to handle effectively the numerous pressing prob-
lems of a modern state. It has been well said that every human institu-
tion must change if it is to last. It would be tragic if at this critical time
the country's efforts to achieve domestic and world reconstruction were
frustrated by worship at the shrine of vested error.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:58:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
