1947]
GOLDENWEISER: THE ECONOMIST AND THE STATE
3
An incidental, but not unimportant, advantage of such a procedure.
would be that it would counteract the effect of pronouncements on con-
troversial questions appearing from time to time, attributed to a stated
number of economists. For many reasons such statements are not the
best way for economists to voice their views. There is no way of judging
whether those who are quoted represent a prevailing or a minority
opinion. The questions on which the views are expressed are not selected
by a representative group-but are usually propounded by an energetic
individual who wants to gather support for his position. Not infre-
quently the issues presented are minor from the viewpoint of the public
interest. Also, because of their unidentified origin and the unsystematic
selection of signers (at least as far as the public knows), such pronounce-
ments are likely to be taken as propaganda efforts by an interested
group. Finally, in practice the questions are often ambiguously worded
and do not offer a good opportunity of indicating clear-cut views on well-
defined issues. Experience shows that occasional pronouncements of this
sort, well intentioned and public spirited as their objectives may be,
have done nothing in most cases to enhance the prestige of the profes-
sion but, on the contrary, have tended to bring it under suspicion of
being either unrealistic or influenced by some pressure group.
From the point of view of the Association, this is important because
statements by a substantial number of its members are likely to be in-
terpreted by some as expressing the views of the profession as a whole,
or of the Association itself. This is prejudicial to its interests and to those
of the vast majority of its less vocal members. Clearly the Association
would not wish and is not in a position to do anything to interfere with
the freedom of its members to express themselves publicly in any way
they choose. That is their privilege, and one consistent with the texture
of democratic ideas. But while nothing can be done to prevent such
statements or to discourage them, the establishment of official polls
would go a long way toward counteracting their harmful effect on the
standing of the profession.
There are many issues on which there is practical unanimity among
economists, while public opinion is widely divided. There are others, it
is rumored, on which agreement has not been reached even among mem-
bers of the profession. Clarification of the issues and focusing attention
of the members on them would result in making many members feel a
greater sense of their urgency and to induce them to review and organize
their thinking in relation to the realities of the day in fields not confined
to their immediate specialty.
At no time has it been more important for economists to have the
respect and confidence of the public, or more necessary for the country
to make the best possible use of the specialized training, knowledge, and
