would gather from current statements of many experts, not to mention
politicians, statesmen, and other laymen.
Let me first discuss the case of the highly developed industrial
countries. As far as Continental Europe, Japan, and Australia are con-
cerned, my optimistic statement will probably not be questioned.
These countries can indeed look back to a decade and a half
of almost unprecedented and unbroken growth and prosperity, which
has definitely gone beyond the stage that could be reasonably regarded
merely as recovery from the low levels reached at the end of the war.
But I go on to say that an objective evaluation shows that, contrary to
what is often said or implied, the over-all performance of the American
economy, too, has been quite satisfactory in the sense defined above.
This holds for the whole postwar period including the last five or six
years of slightly slower growth and somewhat higher unemployment
of which we have heard so much in recent years. True, the U.S. rate of
growth has been much lower than that of Europe and Japan, but it has
been somewhat higher, over all and per capita, than it was, not only
during the whole interwar period, but for any period of similar length
(leaving out the Great Depression) since 1909 when reliable deflated
GNP figures begin. In the nineteenth century, aggregate GNP grew
faster, but as far as we can tell per head or per man-hour growth was
slower than during the postwar period.
The great improvement of the postwar years over earlier periods is,
of course, the complete absence of deep depressions. This is common
knowledge and it is, I think, fairly generally agreed now that there are
excellent reasons for assuming that deep depressions are a thing of the
past. I share this conviction and shall not repeat the well-known argu-
ment. But let us recall that this consensus, which now seems to extend
even to Marxist economists, did not exist or was at least much less
widespread only ten years ago.
But how about the last five years of somewhat slower growth and
higher unemployment? The critics of our economic system call it semi-
depression, just about the best one can expect under a capitalist free
enterprise regime. Many others agree with the diagnosis of an intoler-
able stagnation, but think that it could be cured by bold expansionary
measures. Some think that monetary and fiscal expansion alone would
not be enough, that drastic structural reforms (retraining of workers
on a massive scale, redistribution of income, and others) would be re-
quired to get the economy back to a high level of employment and to
keep it there. 13
To me any comparison with the 1930's, quantitative or qualitative,
seems to be entirely unwarranted, and structural factors explain only
* The most extreme position has been taken by Gunnar Myrdal in [14].