bility. Theory enables us to predict that traffic will be slower and accidents
more frequent, but it does not enable us to predict that any particular
driver will drive more slowly or have an accident. The model of
the reactions of the individual driver was not designed to explain the
actual driving of any particular operator but only to explain the observable
consequences of the observed change of conditions by deducing
from the model the theoretical reactions of a hypothetical driver.
Our analogy can also show us the limitations of the model: the prediction
will hold only if there is a large number of automobiles on the
road. If only a very few cars are around, there may be no accident and
there need not be a reduction in their speed. Conceivably, the operators
may all be good and self-confident drivers. Marginal analysis of
hypothetical driver reaction will suffice for explaining and predicting
the consequences of a change in driving conditions if the number of
automobiles on the highways is large. If the number is small, behavioral
research will be needed, though it may or may not be worth the
cost.
Still another use can be made of our analogy: to show the vast
differences in the scope of questions to which answers can or cannot be
expected with the aid of a given theory, for example, from the theory
of overtaking as sketched in my article. Compare the following four
questions: (1) How fast will traffic move? (2) How fast will the automobile
driven by Mr. X move? (3) How will the speed of traffic be
affected by fog? (4) How will the speed of Mr. X's driving be affected
by fog?
The theory sketched by me offers no answer to the first question, because
each of the variables specified may have very different values for
different cars and drivers; it has no answer to the second question, and
only a suggestion, a rebuttable presumption, for answering the fourth
question, because the theory is not really concerned with particular
persons or their actions and reactions. The theory is equipped only to
answer the third question, regarding the effects of a change in driving
conditions on automobile traffic in general, and even this answer will
be qualitative only, without good clues to numerical results. It may be
interesting to get answers to all four questions, but since Question 3
can be answered with a fraction of the information that would be
needed to answer the other questions, it would be foolish to burden the
models designed for Question 3 with irrelevant matters, or to reject
such models because they cannot do what they are not designed to do.³


#### Split:
A behavioral theory of automobile driving would probably study the process by which
the decision to pass a truck is arrived at in a sequence of bickering among the members
of the family: Mama and Sis trying to argue against taking an unnecessary risk, Sonny
egging on his Dad to speed up and pass the truck "crawling" ahead of them. Moreover,
the theory would not be satisfied with "explaining" the decision to overtake but it would