each group can rightfully claim that the opposition's case is not de-
monstrably correct or in certain respects is incomplete, the weakness of
the case is attributed to the influence of special interests or willful
misunderstanding. And under attack conceptions of interest tend to
narrow and ideological positions to harden.
It must, of course, be recognized that institutional relations and
ideologies do change under the pressures of circumstance. The 1930's
witnessed a quasi-revolutionary shift in the relationship of govern-
ment, business, and labor in the United States and this shift was ac-
companied by the public acceptance of substantial changes in ideas
concerning the functioning of the economy and the role of government
therein. A sobering question that now confronts us is whether it will
require a longer period of stagnation and deeper depression than we
have experienced over the last six years to force changes in institu-
tional relationships and ideologies and, if so, what shape are those
changes likely to take? Or is it possible through some process of social
invention and adaptation to accomplish necessary changes without
waiting for the build-up of irresistible pressures?
One of the difficulties in the current situation is that 5½ to 6 per
cent unemployment and an annual growth rate of a little more than
2 per cent do not seem too serious. Before the advent of unemploy-
ment insurance, unemployment meant misery. Now it is interpreted to
mean lost output, a concept that presumably has some significance
for statisticians, economists and such ilk but does not impinge heavily
on the consciousness of most people. With per capita incomes at
$2,800 and average family incomes between $6,000 and $7,000 it is
also somewhat difficult to get excited about the lagging U.S. growth
rate. Furthermore, it is easy for apologists of the status quo to point
at any given time to the fact that output, employment or almost any
figure you care to name is, in a favorite phrase, “the highest in our
history." One is inclined to sympathize with the plaintive enquiry of
Senator Javits who, after listening to testimony of this sort, was
moved to ask "Why, if all of our indexes are up, are we very wor-
ried?" [12, p. 13].
It is, however, becoming increasingly difficult to deny that U.S.
unemployment figures mean what they purport to mean. Even after
adjustment to U.S. reporting techniques the unemployment rate in
1960 in France was 1.9 per cent, Great Britain 2.4 per cent, Germany
1 per cent, Sweden 1.5 per cent, while ours was 5.6 per cent [11, p.
220]. The divergence of our growth rate from those of the principal
Western European growth rates, and indeed from our own long-term
trend, has been too persistent and too glaring to be ignored. Moreover,
though the record of the last five years may be brushed off as atypi-