KUZNETS: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INCOME INEQUALITY
19
ing free benefits from government, there is surely a stronger case for
assuming a long swing in inequality of income net of direct taxes and
including government benefits. Progressivity of income taxes and, in-
deed, their very importance characterize only the more recent phases of
development of the presently developed countries; in narrowing in-
come inequality they must have accentuated the downward phase of
the long swing, contributing to the reversal of trend in the secular
widening and narrowing of income inequality.
7
No adequate empirical evidence is available for checking this con-
jecture of a long secular swing in income inequality; nor can the phases
be dated precisely. However, to make it more specific, I would place the
early phase in which income inequality might have been widening, from
about 1780 to 1850 in England; from about 1840 to 1890, and particu-
larly from 1870 on in the United States; and, from the 1840's to the
1890's in Germany. I would put the phase of narrowing income in-
equality somewhat later in the United States and Germany than in
England perhaps beginning with the first world war in the former and
in the last quarter of the 19th century in the latter.
Is there a possible relation between this secular swing in income
inequality and the long swing in other important components of the
growth process? For the older countries a long swing is observed in the
rate of growth of population-the upward phase represented by accel-
eration in the rate of growth reflecting the early reduction in the death
rate which was not offset by a decline in the birth rate (and in some
cases was accompanied by a rise in the birth rate); and the downward
phase represented by a shrinking in the rate of growth reflecting the
more pronounced downward trend in the birth rate. Again, in the older
countries, and also perhaps in the younger, there may have been a
secular swing in the rate of urbanization, in the sense that the propor-
tional additions to urban population and the measures of internal mi-
gration that produced this shift of population probably increased for
a while from the earlier much lower levels; but then tended to diminish
as urban population came to dominate the country and as the rural
reservoirs of migration became proportionally much smaller. For old,
and perhaps for young countries also, there must have been a secular
swing in the proportions of savings or capital formation to total eco-
nomic product. Per capita product in pre-industrial times was not large
enough to permit as high a nationwide rate of saving or capital forma-
tion as was attained in the course of industrial development: this is
7 Prokopovich's data on Prussia, from the source cited in footnote 1, indicate a sub-
tantial widening in income inequality in the early period. The share of the lower 90 per
cent of the population declines from 73 per cent in 1854 to 65 per cent in 1875; the share
of the top 5 per cent rises from 21 to 25 per cent. But I do not know enough about the
data for the early years to evaluate the reliability of the finding.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 01:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
