of the budget raises serious questions about the viability of the economy
its vitality, its productivity, its flexibility and adaptability-to a
far greater extent than was appreciated in the 'thirties. We tend to
accept maladjustments as a sort of force majeure which can be overcome
only by increasing doses of public intervention. The economy
becomes harder to stabilize, and budgetary policy becomes a less effective
stabilizing instrument.
I have long sympathized with the thesis of Colin Clark, the Australian
economist, that a burden of taxation beyond some percentage
of the gross national product (he puts it at 25 per cent) turns upon
itself and, instead of having the deflationary effects intended, becomes
an engine of inflation, partly through pushing up wages and other
costs and thus pushing up prices to the point where the tax burden,
in real terms, has been brought back within the limits of tolerance, and
even more through undermining incentives to produce and to save. The
Cripps budget of 1948, which created a substantial surplus, was regarded
as a miracle of austerity and self-discipline in the harsh conditions
confronting Britain. But there are now many British economists
who question whether the losses in incentives to workers, business
men, and investors have not more than offset the deflationary effects intended.
There are now suggestions in Britain that the way to get more
work is to tax-exempt wages for specific kinds of work or beyond some
standard schedule of work-time. In countries like Britain and Sweden,
and even here, rising corporate taxation is accompanied by rising depreciation
allowances which also tend to undermine the intended effect.
Even we discuss various forms of tax exemption, and make proposals
for legislation, in order to get more work, or more output of particular
kinds, or more saving (and more investment of savings in government
securities). It seems generally agreed that the British tax burden has
reached and probably passed the limits of tolerance; and it seems
more than a coincidence that the disillusionment about the big budget
is being accompanied by a return to general monetary control in Britain
and many other European countries.
As I said earlier, we clearly need a better-rounded monetary-fiscal
policy; and failing this, we should recognize that the next turn of the
road would be toward direct controls, the alternative, in the present
context of events, being more careful scrutiny as to the amount of inflationary
pressure the economy can tolerate. One of the main fears in
Britain today, for example, is that the rearmament program, if it
overtaxes British capacity, may result in permanently fastening upon
Britain the direct controls which since the war they have been seeking
to relax, at least internally. The American answer traditionally has
been to seek relief through increased output. In the war, we got a