6
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
large a fraction of personal income in the United States, at the present
level of $211 billions, is unearned. The facts that 82% of this total is
embraced under wages, salaries and proprietorship incomes, and that
certainly not all the remainder (in pure property income) can be
regarded as unearned, may afford a cue to the answer. Finally, the
principle has to be qualified for consumer caprice, habit, ignorance, and
other impairments of rational behavior. Let me, however, recall the
familiar lines of Wordsworth:
The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.
In other words, we are typically far too much preoccupied with realiz-
ing the principle of maximum satisfaction; and it would indeed be sur-
prising if we did not in large measure accomplish our intent.
In fine, then, maximum satisfaction encounters the barriers of con-
sumer ignorance and irrationality, unearned income, and monopoly.
The materialism of our present age with its remorseless urge toward
higher standards of physical well-being and comfort does not seem to
connote either caprice or inertia on the part of consumers. Unearned
income seems to be ubiquitous; but it is a familiar story that the largest
part of the national income accrues to the poor and to the moderately
well-to-do, and not all income accruing even to the rich is unearned.
Finally, monopoly and monopoly factors permeate nearly all production,
but these elements have a visibility much more marked than the hum-
drum homogeneity of competition. I offer no apology for the wastes
and abuses of our present economic society. But the ardor with which
the American public threw off the constraints imposed by wartime price
controls, rationing, and allocations would seem to indicate that consumer
and producer free choice means something valuable. Consequently the
principle of maximum satisfaction-for all its existing lets and hind-
rances still embodies a truth worth the telling.
The concepts of economic optimum which follow are inferior to
maximum satisfaction, if we employ as a criterion the effectiveness with
which a society applies its limited resources to its wants; and no alterna-
tive economic criterion presents itself. In the "second best” position I
would present the idea of "appropriate fluctuations of output," in the
words of that most eminent English economist, D. H. Robertson.³
Underlying this idea is the conviction, common to nearly all economists,
that the alternation of good and bad times is intimately associated with
waves of technical innovation and the episodic stimulation of new
investment. The process of purely scientific discovery probably goes on
3 D. H. Robertson, Banking Policy and the Price Level, 3rd impression, revised (London,
1932), Chap. II.
