worked: we have a bias in favor of our own research experience. Most
of the researchers on behavioral versions of the theory of the firm look
for their problems to the records of selected large corporations. They
take it for granted that their theory must be designed to explain and
predict the behavior of these firms. This, however, is less so in the case
of economists engaged in the analysis of relative prices, inputs, and
outputs. They look for their problems to the records of entire industries
or industrial sectors. To be sure, some industries are dominated
by large corporations, yet the accent of the analysis is not on the behavior
of these firms but at best on some of the results of that behavior.
Where the focus is not on the behavior of the firm, a theory that
requires information on particular firms to be "plugged in" seems to
them less serviceable than a more general theory, at least as long as
only qualitative, not numerical, results are sought. Hence, even if the
"partial-equilibrium analyst” knows full well that the actual situation
is not a really competitive one, he probably will still make a first try
using the competitive model with good old-fashioned profit maximization.
And if the results appear too odd, appropriate qualifications may
still be able to take care of them more simply than if he had started
with a cumbersome managerial model. (In saying this, I am showing
my bias.)

It is revealing to ask what kind of theory we would apply, at least in
a first approximation, if we were called upon to predict the results of
various kinds of public-policy measures. For questions regarding
short-run effects of changes in the corporation income tax (or an excess-
profits tax) I believe a strong case can be made in favor of a
model of the firm with some managerial variables. If the problem is
whether an increase in cigarette taxes is likely to be fully shifted onto
the consumer or what portion of it may be absorbed by the producers,
I may feel safer with a model that includes managerial objectives. If,
however, the problem is what qualitative effects an increase in the import
duty on a material used in several industries will have on its imports
and on the prices and outputs of the various products of the industries
in question, I would be inclined to work with the simple hypothesis
of profit maximization. I would find it far too cumbersome in
this case to go down to the level of the "real" firms; I could probably
not obtain the necessary data and, even if I did, I might not be able to
rely on the composite results obtained from a firm-by-firm analysis.
The old theory of the firm, where all firms are pure fictions, may give
me in this case-most of the answers, in a rough and ready way, not
with any numerical precision, but with sufficient reliability regarding
the directions of change.

I conclude that the choice of the theory has to depend on the problem