Since the questions under consideration were first raised in this
country by the disappointing recovery from the depression, it is convenient
to begin our survey by a brief examination of some of the
circumstances affecting recovery.

Whatever may be the ultimate effects of the decline in geographical
expansion or the drop in the growth of population, neither of these
influences appears to explain the depression or the disappointing recovery.
Of course, it would have helped had there been another Mississippi
Valley to develop. But no sudden change occurred in the state of
our natural resources between the twenties and the thirties. Furthermore,
older and more developed countries experienced a milder depression
and recovered more completely. As for the spectacular drop in the
rate of population growth between the twenties and the thirties, evidence
is lacking that it produced either an unfavorable shift in the consumption
function or an unfavorable change in the slope of the function.
Indeed, the number of non-employed persons per member of the working
force has shown no appreciable change in forty years.3 The possibility
that drop in the population growth might have retarded expansion
by limiting the opportunity to widen capital is excluded partly by the fact
that the increase in the number of families dropped only slightly, and
partly by the large and persistent unemployment which characterized
the period. As far as the labor supply was concerned, ample opportunity
to widen capital existed.

III

To a considerable extent the depression and the unsatisfactory recovery
are explained by conditions which do not reflect permanent
changes in the economic environment. Failure of banks was probably
the most important single influence in making the depression more
severe in the United States than in most other countries. No one would
contend, however, that the vulnerability of our banking system to
depression was a necessary or permanent condition. The very severity
of the depression and the bank failures which accompanied it were themselves
major impediments to recovery. Consider their effect in diminishing
the fortunes of thousands of local capitalists and in making these
men reluctant to risk the remainder of their resources. Small local
2 By 1936, when 20 out of 23 countries reporting industrial production to the League




#### Split:

of Nations had surpassed the output of 1929, industrial production in the United
States was still 7 per cent below 1929. This country was in twenty-first place out of
23 countries in recovery from 1929. The industrial production in the United Kingdom
in 1936 was 15.8 per cent above 1929; in Sweden, 35.0 per cent; in Finland, 39.0 per
cent; in Denmark, 30.0 per cent; in Hungary, 18.4 per cent.
3

3 The number of non-employed for every gainfully employed worker has changed
as follows: 1900, 2.61; 1910, 2.41; 1920, 2.54; 1930, 2.51; 1940, 2.50.