20
20
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
has stated that a constitution "is not intended to embody a particular
economic theory whether of paternalism and its organic relation of the
citizen to the state, or of laissez-faire." Pollock complained that case
law had been largely modified by doctrines in favour among economists
and publicists and that "judges ought to be very careful about com-
mitting themselves to fashionable economic theories." Failure to pro-
tect themselves was almost certain in his opinion to involve mistakes to
be remedied by legislative amendment which is sure to be unsatis-
factory. We may well ask how far economics has become an indication
of the lag between case law and public opinion and how far legislation
is a result of the efforts of economists to hasten changes in case law.
Certainly the enormous expansion of legislation reflects an unhappy
relationship between economics and law. Many of you will be familiar
with the problem of an economist who appears as a witness and who
makes statements in a written brief which are regarded by lawyers as
concessions to the enemy. In turn economists acting as arbitrators
become annoyed with the tactics of lawyers and favour the appearance
of concessions as an indication of truth.
Changes in attitudes toward common law vary as between different
countries and within the same country as between different periods,
and will depend to an important extent on differences in the character
of economic life particularly as reflected in the division of labour and
in trade. These in turn will vary with the effectiveness with which in-
formation can be made available regarding commodities to be ex-
changed. Highly developed media of communication will become evi-
dent in the emergence of organized exchanges but the effects of in-
accurate and inadequate information will be apparent in outbursts such
as the South Sea Bubble and the various phenomena described by
Arthur H. Cole and Charles Mackay and such as appeared in real
estate booms in the cities of this continent, especially in Western
Canada, and in gold rushes.
As information was handled more efficiently dangers of fanatical
outbreaks became less acute. Quetelet in 1835 commented on the in-
fluence of an expanding press in checking tendencies toward revolu-
tion. It had “singulièrement contribué à faciliter la réaction et par
suite à rendre les grandes revolutions à peu près impossibles; elle
presente cet avantage immense qu'elle ne permet pas aux forces de
s'accummuler d'une manière effrayante, et que la reaction se manifeste
presque aussitôt après l'action, quelquefois même avant que l'action ait
eu le temps de se propager.” The invention of the telegraph and its
*Pollock, Genius of the Common Law, p. 108.
5 A. Quetelet, Sur L'Homme (Paris, 1835), Vol. I, p. 290.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
