analysis offers no material in support of indiscriminate "trust busting"
and that such material must be looked for in the particular circumstances
of each individual case. Nevertheless, many economists support
such indiscriminate "trust busting" and the interesting point is that
enthusiastic sponsors of the private-enterprise system are particularly
prominent among them. Theirs is the ideology of a capitalist economy
that would fill its social functions admirably by virtue of the magic
wand of pure competition were it not for the monster of monopoly or
oligopoly that casts a shadow on an otherwise bright scene. No argument
avails about the performance of largest-scale business, about
the inevitability of its emergence, about the social costs involved in
destroying existing structures, about the futility of the hallowed ideal
of pure competition- or in fact ever elicits any response other than
most obviously sincere indignation.
Even as thus extended, our examples, while illustrating well enough
what ideology is, are quite inadequate to give us an idea of the range of
its influence. The influence shows nowhere more strongly than in
economic history which displays the traces of ideological premises so
clearly, precisely because they are rarely formulated in so many words,
hence rarely challenged-the subject of the role that is to be attributed
in economic development to the initiative of governments, policies,
and politics affords an excellent instance: groupwise, economic historians
have systematically over- or understated the importance of this
initiative in a manner that points unequivocally to prescientific convictions.
Even statistical inference loses the objectivity that should in
good logic characterize it whenever ideologically relevant issues are
at stake. And some of the sociological, psychological, anthropological,
biological waters that wash our shores are so vitiated by ideological
bias that, beholding the state of things in parts of those fields, the
economist might sometimes derive solace from comparison. Had we
time, we could everywhere observe the same phenomenon: that ideologies
crystallize, that they become creeds which for the time being are
impervious to argument; that they find defenders whose very souls
go into the fight for them.
There is little comfort in postulating, as has been done sometimes,
the existence of detached minds that are immune to ideological bias
and ex hypothesi able to overcome it. Such minds may actually exist
"I am not aware of any instances in which the rules of inference themselves have been


#### Split:
ideologically distorted. All the more frequent are instances in which the rigor of tests
is relaxed or tightened according to the ideological appeal of the proposition under discussion.
Since acceptance or rejection of a given statistical result always involves some
risk of being wrong, mere variation in willingness to incur such a risk will suffice, even
apart from other reasons, to produce that well-known situation in which two statistical
economists draw opposite inferences from the same figures.