1944]
WOLFE: ECONOMY AND DEMOCRACY
9
According to the jealousy theory of international relations, pressure
of population in the so-called have-not nations is a danger to inter-
national peace. If this be true, permanent remedy does not lie wholly,
or even primarily, in free trade, or industralization, or any purely eco-
nomic policy. Definite and permanent remedy must rest on moral and
religious changes which will enable the overpopulated countries, through
birth control, to bring their populations into reasonable relation to
their resources. How such changes can be brought about, I do not know.
Industrialization may help, but the example of Japan is not reassuring.
The situation suggests a conflict between two of the Four Freedoms-
Freedom from Want and Freedom of Worship. Every people will hold
that their religion is their own business. Nevertheless, there is great
need for educational missionaries of the right sort, properly grounded
in economic fundamentals, in countries besides Germany.
Freedom from Want is a global ideal, entirely in conformity with
the principle of economic democracy; but the abolition of want de-
pends on economic progress, abroad as at home. Global economic
progress depends on the global progress of rationalism and humanism.
Until these become general, only to limited extent can the principles of
economic democracy be globally realized. Meanwhile, one of the best.
services we can give the world is to set other countries a good example
by maintaining our own standard of living.
Population growth in other countries is a problem which should be
receiving our serious attention, for it is bound to have profound bear-
ing on future international relations. Perhaps Washington is giving this
matter the study it deserves, but if so I am not aware of it.
The acquisitive motives. Coming back now to the confines of our
own country, we turn to the second category of impediments-narrow
selfishness and the acquisitive motives. Here we have to do with in-
centives in economic life. Here, too, we encounter a distressing para-
dox: for the acquisitive motive—the desire to have and to hold is both
the prime mover of enterprise and the main drag which slows down
the whole works. In conjunction with the instincts of curiosity and
workmanship, it gives us notably efficient engineering management, but
by itself it inflicts on us the business policies of restriction of output,
imperfect competition, and monopoly. It has applied science to the
development of a marvelously productive economy, but it has also been
the cause of most of the thievery and robbery, the brutal conquests, and
the bloody wars which blacken the pages of history. Even if we succeed
in ending international aggression, we shall still have to cope, within
our own boundaries, with many uneconomical manifestations of re-
gional and class selfishness-interstate trade barriers, rigid prices,
suppression of inventions, closed shops, closed unions, jurisdictional
