human beings in the prime of their lives without a thought in order to
save one gun." The reason is that, “... the purchase of a cannon causes
an outlay of public funds, whereas human beings are to be had for
nothing by means of a mere conscription decree" [20]. Irving Fisher
also clearly and cogently presented an all-inclusive concept of capital
[6]. Yet the main stream of thought has held that it is neither appropriate
nor practical to apply the concept of capital to human beings.
Marshall [11], whose great prestige goes far to explain why this view
was accepted, held that while human beings are incontestably capital
from an abstract and mathematical point of view, it would be out
of touch with the market place to treat them as capital in practical
analyses. Investment in human beings has accordingly seldom been
incorporated in the formal core of economics, even though many
economists, including Marshall, have seen its relevance at one point or
another in what they have written.

The failure to treat human resources explicitly as a form of capital,
as a produced means of production, as the product of investment, has
fostered the retention of the classical notion of labor as a capacity to
do manual work requiring little knowledge and skill, a capacity with
which, according to this notion, laborers are endowed about equally.
This notion of labor was wrong in the classical period and it is patently
wrong now. Counting individuals who can and want to work and treating
such a count as a measure of the quantity of an economic factor is
no more meaningful than it would be to count the number of all manner
of machines to determine their economic importance either as a stock
of capital or as a flow of productive services.

Laborers have become capitalists not from a diffusion of the ownership
of corporation stocks, as folklore would have it, but from the acquisition
of knowledge and skill that have economic value [9]. This
knowledge and skill are in great part the product of investment and,
combined with other human investment, predominantly account for the
productive superiority of the technically advanced countries. To omit
them in studying economic growth is like trying to explain Soviet ideology
without Marx.

II. Economic Growth from Human Capital

Many paradoxes and puzzles about our dynamic, growing economy
can be resolved once human investment is taken into account. Let me
begin by sketching some that are minor though not trivial.
When farm people take nonfarm jobs they earn substantially less
than industrial workers of the same race, age, and sex. Similarly nonwhite
urban males earn much less than white males even after allowance
is made for the effects of differences in unemployment, age, city