United States, as does Table II, for Australia; while Table III covers
the investigations for the three British Dominions of New Zealand,
South Africa, and Canada.
We may properly begin with a consideration of the American results,
which include four time series studies for the period 1899-1922, and
six cross-section or inter-industry investigations for the various census
years from 1889 to 1919. It is unfortunate that the statistics of capital
were omitted from the United State Census of Manufactures after
1919 and that we have been unable to continue our analysis of Ameri-
can data beyond the dates stated. Fortunately, the British Dominions
in their admirable annual Censuses of Production have continued to
collect statistics on the amounts of capital invested and this has per-
mitted us to carry on studies for these countries in more recent times.
The four sets of time studies for the United States show somewhat
differing results because of the differences which exist between the
series of index numbers for labor and product. The precise nature of
these series is described in the footnotes to Table I. It is believed
that Series II, III, and IV, are appreciable improvements over the
original Cobb-Douglas series or Series I. It will be observed that Series
II and III, which use total man years (including clerical employees
as well as wage earners) and total standard man hours respectively,
as the measure of labor, show k's with values of .78 and .73 respectively.
Series IV, which eliminates secular trends from each of the three basic
series and expresses each observation as a percentage of its respective
trend, gives k a value of .63. The value of j varies from .15 under
Series II to .30 under Series IV. On the whole, Series II is the one in
which the definition of the factors of production is most comparable
to that of the cross-section or inter-industry studies, but Series IV
avoids the dangers connected with the downward bias of the index of
production and also eliminates the factor of time.
Five of the six inter-industries studies show lower values for k than
do Series I, II, and III of the time studies. The k's average .63 for the
six cross-section years with the average of the j's amounting to .34. The
values of k and j for the initial and terminal years of 1889 and 1919,
however, deviate appreciably from this average. Those for the earlier
years have lower values of k and higher values of j, while in 1919 this
tendency is reversed. The values of the exponents during the four
middle years of 1899, 1904, 1909, and 1914, however, do exhibit a
marked stability around the general average, with the k's ranging
between .61 and .65, and the j's between .31 and .37.
It will be observed that in three cross-section studies, the values of
k and j are many times their respective standard errors, the k's from