1943] NOURSE: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THE COMMON INTEREST 3
through many of its agencies, set or significantly modify a rate or
price; large industrial or mercantile corporations, banker affiliations,
coöperative associations, labor unions may also inject similar fixations
of exchange ratios into the stream of economic life, leaving the affected
parties to adjust their operations to the resultant situations as best they
may. Or these administrative agencies-public or private-may decide
autocratically to turn whole blocks of given resources into the stream
of production or trade at specific places or to withold them. In this
event, the price system must absorb the impact of these centralized
determinations of volume as best it can.
When the irresistible force of these operational determinations
meets the immovable body of price interrelationship, or when the
irresistible force of these mandated prices encounters the immovable
body of operative reality, an economic impasse of some degree develops
unless by rare good fortune or even rarer wisdom the controlled mag-
nitude has been set in mutually consistent relationship to the uncon-
trolled magnitudes. When local tangles arising from such causes cumu-
late into a general log jam of business, we have, in Hansen's phrase,
"stagnation” or, in Slichter's phrase, "disappointing recovery.” All of
us have lively recollection of the clinical manifestations of this phe-
nomenon during the thirties and many of us have a lively apprehension
of further and perhaps still more disastrous manifestations in the later
forties and the fifties in spite of the panacea of public spending that
Dr. Hansen prescribes.
It may in this connection be replied that men have in their economic
life always been making positive and simultaneous price and operative
decisions or choices, which interacted upon each other to produce the
eternal flow of self-adjusting business life. This life had its ups and
downs, of course, but it had also a dependable trend toward partial
equilibria and general equilibrium. To use Edgeworth's phrase, quoted
by Mills, there were ripples and "viscous waves" upon the surface of
"a sluggish sea." One could add that disturbances might become violent
enough to bring disaster to any individual mariner or even at times to
many of the craft within a particular area. But the duration and char-
acter of these phenomena were strictly limited by the fluid or "viscous"
character of the medium.
There are, however, polar regions of the sea, where temperatures
are low enough to freeze even salt water. There we encounter phe-
nomena to which the physical laws of fluids do not apply. No more is
the economics of individualism adequate to the problems of large and
rigid business groups and government participation in business. I think
it not fantastic to suggest that the economic phenomena of corporate,
union, and government price administration and large-scale decision of
