ment. The satisfactions consist not only in receiving money incomes,
immediate or deferred, and various incomes in kind, but also in dis-
tributing incomes to others and in gaining prestige, power, self-esteem,
as well as in enjoying a good conscience and other pleasurable feelings.
What makes things really complicated is that the creation of these
satisfactions is related to very different flows of funds into and out of
the firm: some to gross revenue (sales volume), others to net revenue;
some to profits distributed, others to profits retained; some to invest-
ment outlays, others to company expenses. The managers' immediate
money incomes and some of the emoluments received in kind are part-
ly at the expense of profits, partly at the expense of corporate income
taxes (and every change in tax rates changes the trade-off ratios.)
The same is true of several other company expenses which add to the
prestige, power, and self-esteem of the managers. Special mention may
be made of the provision of stock options for managers, which are ei-
ther at the expense of the owners' equity (through watering down their
stock) or at the expense of potential capital gains on treasury stock
earmarked for such stock options, but which, on the other hand, may
be a powerful force aligning the managers' personal interests with the
goal of maximizing the net profits of the firm.
The point of it all is that the total utility of managers can be in-
creased by decisions which increase expenses at the expense of profits.
(Of course, this is confined to situations where profits are high enough
to stand encroachments by avoidable expenses-to situations, that is,
where the firm is not hard-pressed by competition.) The question is
how various changes in conditions will affect managerial decisions on
inputs, outputs, and prices if the objectives of management include the
gratification of preferences for certain expenses of the firm that com-
pete with the maximization of profits."


#### Split:
11 Instead of cataloguing the various contributions to the "utility” of the management
and their relationships to the sources and uses of the firm's funds, one may wish to classify
the expenses of the firm with reference to "discretionary" decisions of the management
influenced by the decision-makers' preferences. Here is a tentative classification of this
sort:
1. Expenses required for the production of (a) current output of unchanged size,
(b) additional current output, with marginal cost not exceeding marginal revenue (hence,
contributing to higher profits), and (c) additional current output, with marginal cost
exceeding marginal revenue (hence, reducing profits).
2. Expenses not required for the production of current output, but increasing the pro-
ductive capacity or efficiency of the firm for future production.
3. Expenses for managerial personnel in the form of (a) salaries and bonuses, and
(b) services rendered to them for their convenience and pleasure.
4. Expenses not required for either current or future production, but (a) expected of
a profitable firm as a social service, and only slightly promoting the public image of
management, (b) widely recognized as contributing to the social or national benefit and
as indicative of the public spirit of the management, (c) contributing chiefly to the grati-
fication of personal desires of supervisory and managerial personnel, and (d) largely