appears to lurk in proposals for instituting special-interest representation
on the regulatory agencies themselves, as in case of the tri-partite
board for handling labor disputes and wage stabilization during the war
period. However helpful this form of organization may have proved to
be in facilitating the disposition of industrial conflicts in the special
emergency situations with which we were then faced, it did not
contribute to the maintenance of orderly processes or the development
of enduring principles. All interests involved in regulatory proceedings
should, as a matter of course, be accorded full opportunity to present
evidence and argument bearing upon every aspect of the problems at
issue; but since the very fact of government intervention springs from
the recognition of a general interest that transcends the special interests
of the parties, the process of decision should be entrusted exclusively to
public representatives. In other words, internal as well as external
pressures may constitute an impediment to the maintenance of genuine
administrative independence.

But in the last analysis the most far-reaching safeguards against
possible excesses of public control, whether they be substantive or
procedural in character, lie in the preservation of the democratic
environment of governmental action. Important control policies usually
draw their initial impetus from expressions of popular dissatisfaction
with existing conditions. At least in general terms proposed measures
tend to be discussed in political campaigns and to bear upon the
fortunes of political parties and candidates. In due course they are
investigated by legislative committees and debated in the law-making
chambers. After control measures are adopted they are likely to be
tested in the courts as to their constitutional validity and legal scope.
They are then executed and enforced by the regulatory agencies,
generally under quasi-judicial procedures, and the findings and
conclusions of the investigations are public records. Individual
determinations and directives are subject to judicial review, for abuse
of administrative discretion, and the entire regulatory performance is
subject to virtually unrestricted legislative inquiry. When patent improprieties
or unacceptable results emerge, the law-making bodies have
constantly recurring opportunity to reverse or modify or expand prevailing
policies and practices; and the whole deliberative cycle may again be
brought into play. After due allowance is made for the large measure of
unreality that often characterizes public discussions of public issues,
as well as for the obstacles to relinquishment of established control
arrangements that derive from vested governmental interests, serious
errors of economic policy cannot in the long run withstand the pressure
of these democratic processes. As long as we exercise the necessary
vigilance to preserve without impairment our political liberties, including