In agriculture no less than in industry and commerce, the private
individual stands out as the innovator and enterpriser. We are all
familiar with the contributions to scientific farming made by Jethro
Tull, Lord Townshend, and other giants of the era. What we frequently
overlook is that a host of small farmers were experimenting with crop
rotation and better breeding of livestock. The few names that stand out
so strikingly are a reflection of a development common to all English
agriculture.
But not only in economic affairs and in the advance of technology
did the phenomenon of individualism manifest itself. Mitchell por-
trayed to his students in a striking manner the extent to which the
spirit of individual enterprise and initiative permeated the whole
cultural fabric of eighteenth-century England. Individuals, frequently
of humble origin but always of unusual talent, imagination, and enter-
prise, raised the level of cultural achievement throughout its whole
range. The fine arts, literature, historical writing, journalism, the law,
religion, philanthropy, education-all felt the impact of individuals of
great intelligence and vision who dedicated themselves to the trans-
forming of ideas into reality. William Hogarth, son of a schoolmaster,
used painting as a medium for the pointing of a moral and the telling
of a tale, creating his own art by using color instead of language.
Joshua Reynolds, also the son of a schoolmaster, and Thomas Gains-
borough brought portraiture to new heights. In recognition of his
achievement Reynolds became the first president of the Royal Acad-
emy. Daniel Defoe (1661-1731), the son of a butcher, in Robinson
Crusoe, Samuel Richardson (1689-1761), the son of a London wood-
worker, in Pamela and Clarissa Harlowe, and Henry Fielding (1707-
1754) in Tom Jones by the middle of the eighteenth century had
given shape to a new form of writing, the modern English novel. James
Boswell in his classic Life of Samuel Johnson was the creator of a
new type of biography that portrayed the life of his subject in an
unusually intimate and effective manner. David Hume wrote his His-
tory of England, William Robertson his History of Scotland during the
Reigns of Queen Mary and King James VI, and Edward Gibbon his
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, all "models of exposition con-
cerning the past of the race" that, as Mitchell observed, carried a
different appeal and suggested a different outlook on life from previous
histories.
The eighteenth century witnessed the beginnings of modern journal-
ism with the publication of newspapers combining the functions of re-
porting news and selling advertising. The Morning Post appeared in
1772, the London Times in 1788, and the Morning Advertiser in 1794.
These had been preceded earlier in the century by a series of periodi-