and policy has been the difficulty of translating theory into policy because
of practical politics or administration. The economist refrains
from drawing a policy conclusion because its implementation would
pose large social or administrative costs. Mill dismissed an income tax
because of the inquisitorial burdens it would put on taxpayers; one
would have thought that he would remember that an earlier inquisition
had been welcomed to Spain. For at least 100 years economists have
recommended that a nation proceed to free trade gradually over a fiveyear
period to ease the transition, and the period is usually lengthened
if protectionism is on the ascendant. I have often wondered why we
deem it necessary to tell a confirmed drunkard not to reduce his drinking
too rapidly.
A third, and fortunately a moderately rare, reason for separating
theory from policy is flagrant inconsistency, usually stemming from
that great source of inconsistency in intelligent men, a warm heart.
Marshall proved-rather unconvincingly, I must say that the doctrine
of consumer surplus instructed us to tax necessaries rather than
luxuries [5, p. 467 n.]. The idea was disposed of in a footnote because
it disregarded ability to pay. The economic arguments against minimum
wage legislation have usually been refuted by reference to the
need of poorer people for larger incomes.
The essential ambiguity of general theoretical systems with respect
to public policy, however, has been the real basis of our troubles. So
long as a competent economist can bend the existing theory to either
side of most viable controversies without violating the rules of professional
work, the voice of the economist must be a whisper in the
legislative halls.
IV
The economic role of the state has managed to hold the attention of
scholars for over two centuries without arousing their curiosity. This
judgment that the perennial debate has refused to leave the terrain
of abstract discourse is true, I believe, of the continental literature as
well as the English and American literature. Economists have refused
either to leave the problem alone or to work on it.
Why have not the effects of the regulatory bodies on prices and
rates been ascertained, even at the cost of a 1 per cent reduction in the
literature on how to value assets for rate purposes? Why have not the
effects of welfare activities on the distribution of income been determined
for an important range of such activities, even at the cost of a 1
per cent reduction in denunciations of the invasion of personal liberty?
Why has not the degree of success of governments in bringing private
and social costs together been estimated, even at the cost of a 1 per