upon the relevant possibilities of action tend to deprive such targets of
the credibility they would need to possess in order significantly to
affect business decision-making.
It seems probable that any one of the “radical” plans for handling
the balance-of-payments problem such as increasing the price of gold,
devaluation, or expanding the reserve functions of the International
Monetary Fund, might open up new opportunities for stabilization
policy. It seems probable that none of these courses of action will be
followed. It is more likely that, if relief is provided, it will take the
form of a reduction of foreign, particularly economic, aid programs.
But whether this happens or not the balance of payments as an essential
part of the stabilization problem promises to be with us for a long
time.
In spite of the obstacles to effective stabilization and growth policies
stressed in this paper, the United States may nevertheless move toward
a satisfactory growth rate within a context of relative stability.
The acceleration of family formation foreseen for the mid-'60's, an
unexpectedly rapid exploitation of new technological possibilities, or
even unplanned changes in labor-management or other group relationships,
might make such a development possible. I have too little confidence
in economic forecasts including my own to deny this possibility.
But it does seem clear that any approach to a satisfactory situation
with respect to stability and growth will owe much less to deliberate
policy and much more to autonomous developments in the economy
than has been true in recent years in Western Europe. And for this
the historically determined relationships between government, business,
and labor are largely responsible.


#### Split:
REFERENCES
1. NEIL CHAMBERLAIN, “The Corporation and the Trade Union,” in E. S.
Mason, ed., The Corporation and Modern Society. Cambridge 1959.
2. E. F. DENISON, The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States
and the Alternatives Before Us, Committee for Economic Development
Supplementary Paper 13. New York 1962.
3. J. T. DUNLOP, "Policy Problems" in American Assembly, Wages, Prices,
Profits and Productivity. New York 1959.
4. MILTON GILBERT, “The Postwar Business Cycle in Western Europe,” Am.
Econ. Rev., Proc., May 1962, 52, 93-109.
5. M. SLADE KENDRICK, A Century and a Half of Federal Expenditures,
Nat. Bur. Econ. Research Occas. Paper 48. New York 1955.
6. M. W. LEISERSON, “A Brief Interpretive Survey of Wage-Price Problems
in Europe," Study Paper 11, Joint Economic Committee. Washington
1959.