the housing of working people are said to have led to deterioration in
health because higher rentals left less to be spent for food. The excep-
tionally high percentage of literacy attained by the Japanese may have
entailed excessive sacrifices in their consumption level as a whole.
Fundamentally important though good nutrition is, it cannot be
expected that individuals or groups will give it complete primacy
among their wants. The poorest insist on their luxuries. Sir William
Petty found that Irish peasants of the mid-seventeenth century, living
in utter squalor on very poor diets, spent two-sevenths as much on
tobacco as on food.³ In parts of India the ryot living in dire poverty
extravagantly gratified “his passion for marrying off his daughters
expensively, and giving his father an elaborate funeral."
In general, optimum standards in respect to specific needs are rarely
attainable if the consumption level of the individual or group is neces-
sarily deficient in several respects. This is not generally realized. If
the attainable average level is, say, only 50 per cent of the most con-
servative optimum, 100 per cent plus a margin of safety will rarely be
aimed at in any one phase of consumption, e.g., nutrition. Under such
circumstances, some sacrifices of needs to preferences is almost in-
evitable.
Plane or Content of Living
The most important single concept in this field is often reasonably
called the plane or level of living. The word "content" better suggests
a more than two-dimensional quantity, something in which composition
and quality as well as size are important, and something to which one
can apply not merely the adjectives high-low but also such others as
superior-inferior, expensive-thrifty, elaborate-simple, and ample-
restricted. "Improving the content of living" is much more meaningful
than "raising the plane of living." The words "plane" and "level,"
however, are convenient to use with this enriched meaning.
The plane or content of living is a reality experienced by an indi-
vidual or group. It is made up of a complex combination of consumption,
working conditions, possessions, freedoms, and "atmosphere," and the
balance or harmony among them, in relation to needs and felt wants.
Consumption includes having available, as well as using, free goods
of nature and public goods that are utilized without charge, and self-
service and mutual service, in addition to purchased commodities and
services and the use of semidurable and durable goods owned or rented.
C. H. Hull, ed., The Economic Writings of Sir William Petty (Cambridge, England,
1899), Vol. I, pp. 188-92.
4
* Vaughan Nash, The Great Famine and Its Causes (London, 1900), p. 91.