satisfactory to the historian of direct political development, have impor-
tant influences upon such legislative events as the repeal of the Corn
Laws. Indeed, Ricardo was subtle enough to muck up the simple-
minded case for harmonious free trade.
Jeremy Bentham, a friend of James Mill and Ricardo, was a char-
acter who would have been unbelievable if he had appeared in a book.
(He once seriously asked James Mill for his eldest son. James thought
that an excessive demand on friendship, but did lease him John to help
clean out the Augean stables of Bentham manuscripts; this was but
one of the feats of Hercules that John accomplished with distinction
and at incredibly early ages.)
Bentham's influence on modern law and institutions has always been
recognized by historians as having been great: the nineteenth century
where legislation is concerned is truly Bentham's shadow writ large, as
Dicey has said. Crane Brinton once quipped: "The New Deal had a
good deal of old Bentham in it." And I have dared to suggest that the
logic of Bentham's position would in later times have gone beyond his
fortuitous individualism, so that his thought is really congenial to that
of Fabians like Sidney Webb. Bentham, though not an economist's econ-
omist nor even primarily an economist, had I am sure an influence far
greater than that of Ricardo.
Have I now not proved too much? Why then has Ricardo had the
good press with posterity if my strictures are at all near the mark? I
think the answer depends upon a different kind of luck. David Ricardo
happens to be the darling both of the liberal economists who followed
in his direct line and of the Marxian critics of capitalism. Like me,
you may not agree with Ricardo's famous letter to Trower which says,
"Political economy
. . . should rather be called an enquiry into the
laws which determine the division of the produce of industry amongst
the classes who concur in its formation." But you can perceive how
Ricardo's laconic and unsparing remarks about distribution would
stimulate the so-called Ricardian socialists who regarded property in-
comes as exploitation of labor. And once Karl Marx took him up as
an object of worthy study, Ricardo was, so to speak, in on both sides
of the street. Having Piero Sraffa as an editor merely capped Ricardo's
good luck.
John Stuart Mill. I pass by Nassau Senior and the other classical
writers to mention Mill briefly. Mill was modest; Marshall was not.
The world takes people too much at their word. The result is that
Marshall's claims to analytical originality are received too seriously;
6 C. C. Brinton, Ideas of Men: The Story of Western Thought, London 1951, p. 392.
Incidentally, Brinton's index has between Rhodes, Cecil and Richards, I. A. no Ricardo,
David.