ing professional language. Their competence consists in understanding
how an economic system works under alternative institutional frameworks.
If they have anything of their own to contribute to the popular
discussion of economic policy, it is some special understanding of the
relationship between policies and results of policies.
The basic role of the scientist in public policy, therefore, is that of
establishing the costs and benefits of alternative institutional arrangements.
Smith had no professional right to advise England on the Navigations
Acts unless he had evidence of their effects and the probable
effects of their repeal. A modern economist has no professional right to
advise the federal government to regulate or deregulate the railroads
unless he has evidence of the effects of these policies.
This position, you must notice, is not quite the familiar one that an
economist's value judgments have no scientific status-indeed I shall
neither dispute nor praise value judgments. The position is rather that
if a subject is capable of study, a scholar ought to study it before he
advises legislators. Suppose you deplore disease or, conversely, that
you greatly admire the much-persecuted germ. My assertion is that
however you stand, you should not support proposals to compel or to
forbid people to go to a doctor until you find out whether their attendance
on a doctor will increase or decrease the incidence of disease. If this
particular example strikes you as absurdly pedantic, I offer two responses.
First, will your answer be the same whatever the state of
medical science in a country? Second, we shall come to harder problems.

My task, then, is to ask in as hardheaded a way as possible what
precisely was the evidence economists provided for their policy recommendations,
evidence that successfully linked their proposals with the
goals they were seeking to achieve. I begin with Adam.
I
Smith bases his proposals for economic policy upon two main positions.
Neither basis is presented in a formal and systematic fashion,
and there are serious problems in determining exactly why he wishes
most economic life to be free of state regulation.
Smith's first basis for his economic policies was his belief in the efficiency
of the system of natural liberty. There can be little doubt that
this tough-minded Scotsman, this close friend of that cool and clear
thinker, David Hume, had a deep attachment to the natural law of the
late enlightenment. But Smith did not propose natural liberty as a lay
religion of political life. Instead he argued, as a matter of demonstrable
economic analysis, that the individual in seeking his own betterment
will put his resources where they yield the most to him, and that as a
rule the resources then yield the most to society. Where the individual