sovereignty and their growing social welfare consciousness, often do not
welcome the nineteenth-century kind of foreign investment, which they
regard as "exploitation," a process of extraction at low cost of what the
industrial countries wanted, while doing little or nothing toward creat-
ing a better rounded economy and a better scale of living. Thus, the
urge for a mixed economy collides with the world need for primary pro-
duction. Moreover, the number of countries is limited from which good
results could be expected from any large-scale program of investment.
Probably what we need in many countries is pilot experiments, such as
the International Bank might undertake (and has already); and in
any event any general investment program would have to be planned or
controlled by governments, not only because private capital is still
timid (after the mistakes of the 'twenties) but because we would not
otherwise know how the parts might fit together.
These are surely not short-run problems. Nor are they problems for
which good policy answers can be derived from formal theory.
IX
As I look back over my paper, I have some misgivings. The discus-
sion of current problems has taken more space than I intended, and it
may well be a mistake to try to cover such large areas of policy in what
can at best be only thumb-nail sketches. It may well be too that some
readers who might not be unsympathetic to the general thesis of this
paper, and might want to join me in some of my confessions, may fall
out with me when it comes to the specific policies. For I have often
felt that, whether we agree or disagree in our formal theorizing, it is
when we come to policy making that we really find out how we stand.
But in any case, I did feel the need of attempting some kind of illustra-
tion of what I was driving at in the earlier portions of the paper.
Now that I have somewhat eased my mind of some things that have
long been on it about economic theory and method and the purposes of
economic inquiry, I should like somewhat to smooth the troubled waters
-though I do hope I have troubled them. If any theorist takes my
remarks too much to heart, I can only say that I never get much beyond
being in a quandary. As Keynes said, without theory we are "lost in
the woods." We must of course have hypotheses for testing. But it is a
close question whether it is any worse to be lost in the woods than in
one's theory, pursuing its internal consistency to the point where con-
tact with reality is lost. This, I think, is the biggest of all our dilemmas,
and there may be no escape from it. I do not pretend to have provided
an answer; but it should do us no harm to be aware of the limitations
under which we work.