20
20
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
which individuals place upon group interests and common interests.³2
There are two ways in which groups may advance their interests. One is
based upon a high valuation of one's special interests, and involves
improving the bargaining position of the group for the purpose of
getting a larger share of an income flow with little regard to the effect
upon the size of the total income flow. The other is based upon a high
valuation of general interests and involves restraint in pressing special
claims which conflict with general interests.
It is not for the economist qua economist to quarrel with the valua-
tions which individuals and groups place upon their interests. He is,
however, within his scientific rights when he points out that these valua-
tions have profound economic effects. They determine both the methods
of production which it is possible to use and the quantity of goods that
can be produced. High valuations of special interests can throttle pro-
duction and render the government and every one else incapable of
providing a satisfactory level of employment. High valuations of com-
mon interests will produce public and private policies that will prevent
there being a problem of long-term unemployment.
Is it at all thinkable that groups of workers, employers, and farmers
in dealing with one another and in pressing claims for legislation will
be limited or guided to a substantial extent by concern for the national
income? Or as these groups become more and more highly organized and
more and more conscious of their particular interests, will they become
less and less disposed to place high valuations on common interests?
No one knows. Larger units of decision would help. Wage policy, for
example, which is now made by groups too small to feel much responsi-
bility for the general level of employment, might be made by units such
as the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Associa-
tion of Manufacturers on the one hand and the American Federation of
Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations on the other.³³
Perhaps new machinery must be invented in order that all groups may
agree on the restraints that shall be placed upon their special interests
and in order to make possible new ways of promoting common interests.
A lively concern for common interests by well-organized and self-
conscious special groups may seem a utopian dream; but in an economy
in which the policies of government and of large private groups deter-
mine employment, what substitute is there for it? The possibilities of
82
22 It is not intended to deny that the valuations of the individual member of a
group are molded largely by the leaders of the group. Consequently, the kind of valuations
of group and common interests which emerge are determined in large measure by the kind
of men who lead groups.
33
3 In Sweden the recent depression produced rudimentary beginnings of a national
wage policy made by the federation of employers and the federation of unions. See
P. H. Norgren, The Swedish Collective Bargaining System, p. 303.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:53:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
