perhaps $1 billion. This adverse effect on the balance of payments
would certainly be offset to some extent by a decrease in the flow of
long-term investment capital abroad though this is much more difficult
to estimate.
The difficulties are compounded when one attempts to estimate the
effect of the proposed action on export earnings and on the flow of
short-term funds. How will expansion of output affect the competitive
position of U.S. exporters? Clearly much depends on what happens
to wage rates, wage costs, and wage-price relationships. During the
period 1955-57 when unemployment averaged 4.3 per cent the price
level increased by 2½ per cent a year. On the other hand there were
special influences at work, particularly in the durable goods area,
that may make this period an inappropriate guide to future prospects.
If some significant general rise in wage rates does take place and if
prices are adjusted to this increase, the extent of the adverse effects
on export earnings will depend, among other things, on what, in the
meantime, happens to prices in the principal export markets. Clearly
this is an area in which estimates will be subject to a sizeable margin
of error. Finally, how will the Swiss bankers and their friends in Wall
Street react to the particular combination of fiscal and monetary poli-
cies deemed necessary to attain a 4 per cent level of unemployment?
Will short-term funds move out of the United States and will there be
a large conversion of dollars into gold?
These difficulties and uncertainties are mentioned not to convey the
impression that there is no solution to the problem but to suggest that
there are several solutions, each one of which may be supported by in-
telligent and honorable men not obviously influenced either by interest
or by dogma. It is certainly possible to support with strong arguments
the position that the balance of payments comes first and that until
confidence in the dollar has been restored it would be unwise to under-
take any very significantly expansionary monetary or fiscal policy. It
is also possible for sensible men to espouse the opposite position; that
we can, by a proper combination of fiscal and monetary measures,
move within a reasonable period of time to a position of full employ-
ment without inflicting on our balance of payments a strain that no
practical expansion of international liquidity can manage.
This matter of ignorance is introduced into the discussion because
it modifies quite substantially the significance to be attached to "in-
terests" and "ideologies" in relation to stabilization and growth poli-
cies and because it has a bearing, I believe, on the questions whether
and how a more satisfactory relationship between government and
special groups may be established. It is possible to argue convincingly
that vested interests of one sort or another prevent a solution of a