SCHUMPETER: SCIENCE AND IDEOLOGY
351
true when the object of our interest is an historical report as it is
when the object of our interest is to “rationalize" the Schrödinger
equation though in any particular instance the task of fact finding or
the task of analyzing may so dominate the other as to almost
remove it from sight. Schoolmasters may try to make this clearer to
their pupils by talking about induction and deduction and even set the
one against the other, creating spurious problems thereby. The essential
thing, however we may choose to interpret it, is the "endless give and
take" between the clear concept and the cogent conclusion on the one
hand, and the new fact and the handling of its variability on the other.
Now, so soon as we have performed the miracle of knowing what we
cannot know, namely the existence of the ideological bias in ourselves
and others, we can trace it to a simple source. This source is in the
initial vision of the phenomena we propose to subject to scientific
treatment. For this treatment itself is under objective control in the
sense that it is always possible to establish whether a given statement,
in reference to a given state of knowledge, is provable, refutable, or
neither. Of course this does not exclude honest error or dishonest
faking. It does not exclude delusions of a wide variety of types. But
it does permit the exclusion of that particular kind of delusion which
we call ideology because the test involved is indifferent to any ideology.
The original vision, on the other hand, is under no such control. There,
the elements that will meet the tests of analysis are, by definition,
undistinguishable from those that will not or as we may also put
it since we admit that ideologies may contain provable truth up to
100 per cent the original vision is ideology by nature and may contain
any amount of delusions traceable to a man's social location, to the
manner in which he wants to see himself or his class or group and
the opponents of his own class or group. This should be extended even
to peculiarities of his outlook that are related to his personal tastes
and conditions and have no group connotation-there is even an
ideology of the mathematical mind as well as an ideology of the mind
that is allergic to mathematics.
It may be useful to reformulate our problem before we discuss
examples. Since the source of ideology is our pre- and extrascientific
vision of the economic process and of what is-causally or teleologi-
cally important in it and since normally this vision is then subjected
to scientific treatment, it is being either verified or destroyed by
analysis and in either case should vanish qua ideology. How far, then,
does it fail to disappear as it should? How far does it hold its own
in the face of accumulating adverse evidence? And how far does it vitiate
our analytic procedure itself so that, in the result, we are still left
with knowledge that is impaired by it?
