derstandings about what the other specialist was doing. Many people
cannot understand that others may be talking about altogether
different things when they use the same words.
I am not happy about the practice of calling any study just because
it deals with or employs a concept of the firm “economics" or "micro-
economics." But we cannot issue licenses for the use of such terms
and, hence, must put up with their rather free use. My own prejudices
balk at designating organization theory as economics-but other peo-
ple's prejudices are probably different from mine, and we gain little or
nothing from arguing about the correct scope of our field.
Now what conclusions from all our reviewing may we draw on the
conflicts between marginal analysis, behavioral theory, and managerial
theory of the firm? Fortunately, not much time is being wasted on de-
scriptive studies of a narrowly behaviorist kind, in the sense of re-
cording observed behavior without any prior theoretical design. Most
proponents of behavioral studies of the firm are too competent theo-
rists for that. As far as the proponents of managerial theories are con-
cerned, they have never claimed to be anything but marginalists, and
the behavior goals they have selected as worthy for incorporation into
behavior equations, along with the goal of making profits, were given
differentiable form so that they could become part of marginal
analysis. Thus, instead of a heated contest between marginalism and
managerialism in the theory of the firm, a marriage between the two
has come about.
Not all marriages, these days, are permanent; divorces are frequent.
Whether this marriage will last or end in divorce will depend chiefly on
what offspring it will produce. If the match of the profit hypothesis
with the various managerial hypotheses proves fertile of sufficiently
interesting deductions, the prospects of a lasting marriage are good.
It is not easy to judge the future sterility or fertility of this mar-
riage between marginalism and managerialism, because most of us are
inclined to underrate the kinds of problem on which we have never
"While under profit maximization MR-MC=0, sales maximization requires that
MR=0; hence, for some of the output sold marginal revenue is less than marginal cost,
which cuts into profits. A minimum-profit constraint sets a limit to this.
In the case of maximization of the growth rate of sales the limit on nonremunerative
selling is built into the objective itself because a growth of productive assets is required
to support the growth of sales, and the acquisition of these assets presupposes a sufficiency
of profits, either for internal financing or as a basis for outside finance [3, pp. 1086-87].
If at any time sales were pushed too hard at the expense of profits, there would arise a
shortage of funds for acquiring the productive assets needed for producing more output.
Thus no separate minimum-profit constraint has to be imposed, since it is inherent in
the objective of maximization of the growth of sales. It should be understood, however,
that the growth rate of assets under this objective is still less than it could be under
straight profit maximization. (This shows why we should never speak of the "growth of
the firm" without specifying by what criterion we measure it.)