for the United States, Massachusetts, New South Wales, and Victoria.
In addition, two New Zealand economists, Max Brown¹³ and J. W.
Williams, ¹ have carried through two time studies for New Zealand
while the latter has also carried through a cross-section study for that
country, as has G. W. G. Browne ¹5 for South Africa. We have, therefore,
records for a total of twenty-nine inductive studies of the production
function instead of the three which were reported upon thirteen
years ago in The Theory of Wages.

In these investigations which have been carried out over the last
two decades, we have had the assistance of a devoted and, I believe,
competent group of associates, and in the aggregate many tens of thousands
of hours have been spent upon the work. I am deeply indebted
to this group, and while I am solely responsible for any errors which
may lie within the work, my associates are chiefly entitled to any credit
which may be forthcoming.16

Since these studies were carried out over a period of many years
and since there were differences between countries and between years
within a country in the basic data used, and since we were also constantly
trying to improve our methods, it was inevitable that some
dissimilarities should have developed in the precise content of the
categories used and in the methods of attack. We have now ironed
out a great many of these differences, and I believe that with a few
exceptions which will be later noted, the results have now been made.
roughly comparable. It is hoped that in the next few months they may
be made completely so.

III. The Main Results of the Study of the Production
Function in Manufacturing

We can summarize the main results of these studies in three tables.
Table I brings together the main results for manufacturing in the




#### Split:

18 See an unpublished Ph.D. thesis at Cambridge by Max Brown, The Relation Between
Capital and Labour in New Zealand.

J. W. Williams, "Professor Douglas' Production Function," Econ. Record, Vol. XXV
(1945), pp. 55-63.

15 G. W. G. Browne, "The Production Function for the South African Manufacturing
Industry," So. African Jour. Econ., Vol. XI (Dec., 1943), pp. 258-68.
18 First, of course, I am indebted to my chief associate during this period, namely, Grace
Gunn, and after her to Marjorie L. Handsaker, Patricia Ogburn, Martin Bronfenbrenner,
Ernest Olson, and Estelle Mass. But we have also had the faithful aid of numerous research
assistants, computers, and draftsmen, among whom have been Yetta Abend, Helen Butcher,
Julia Elliott Lewis, Oscar Seltzer, K. Sanow, H. Minsky, B. Nimer, William L. Slayton,
Betty Roth, Donna Allen, Mitchell Locks, Y. K. Wong and Margaret Labadie. My colleague
H. G. Lewis has also been most helpful in his criticisms and suggestions, as have
John H. Smith and Colin Clark.
