lished propositions for the implications of which they did not have
any sympathy. To mention a single instance: to establish the logical
consistency of the conditions (equations) that are descriptive of a
socialist economy will seem to most people equivalent to gaining a
point for socialism; but it was established by Enrico Barone, a man
who, whatever else he may have been, was certainly no sympathizer
with socialist ideals or groups.
But there exist in our minds preconceptions about the economic
process that are much more dangerous to the cumulative growth of our
knowledge and the scientific character of our analytic endeavors because
they seem beyond our control in a sense in which value judgments
and special pleadings are not. Though mostly allied with these, they
deserve to be separated from them and to be discussed independently.
We shall call them Ideologies.
II
The word idéologie was current in France toward the end of the
18th and in the first decade of the 19th century and meant much the
same thing as did the Scottish moral philosophy of the same and an
earlier time or as our own social science in that widest acceptance of
the term in which it includes psychology. Napoleon imparted a derogatory
meaning to it by his sneers at the idéologues-doctrinaire
dreamers without any sense for the realities of politics. Later on, it
was used as it is often used today in order to denote systems of ideas,
that is, in a way in which our distinction between ideologies and
value judgments is lost. We have nothing to do with these or any other
meanings except one that may be most readily introduced by reference
to the "historical materialism" of Marx and Engels. According
to this doctrine, history is determined by the autonomous evolution
of the structure of production: the social and political organization,
religions, morals, arts and sciences are mere "ideological superstructures,
" generated by the economic process.
We neither need nor can go into the merits and demerits of this
conception as such² of which only one feature is relevant to our purpose.
This feature is the one that has, through various transformations,
developed into the sociology of science of the type associated with the
states his preference for the cause for which he argues or not. Independently of this, it


#### Split:
may be sound practice to require that everybody should explicitly state his "axiological
premises" or the interest for which he means to argue whenever they are not obvious.
But this is an additional requirement that should not be confused with ours.
2 In particular, its acceptance is no prerequisite of the validity of the argument that
is to follow and could have been set forth also in other ways. There are, however, some
advantages in starting from a doctrine that is familiar to all and that needs only to be
mentioned in order to call up, in the mind of the audience, certain essential notions in a
minimum of time.