takes such a large proportion of individual and corporate incomes as
it now does. Taxes in recent years have been remarkably well designed
to bear heavily on any enterprise which displays daring, which backs
an innovation or an experiment, especially an experiment which is
pretty certain to experience losses for several years. The loss carry-over
provisions of the corporate income tax could be modified, for example,
to facilitate substantially the accumulation of capital by new concerns.
In times of poor economic visibility and rapid technological change,
much is to be said for a flexible treatment of depreciation allowances.
Enterprises should be encouraged to write off half of the cost of new
assets during the first three or four years of their life. This would in-
crease the subsequent tax liability of the concern, but it would make un-
certain ventures less risky. A large reduction in the tax on that part of
corporate profits spent for plant and equipment (the reverse of the un-
distributed profits tax) would help restore the practice of plowing back
earnings so important if new concerns are to furnish stiff competition
for old ones and important in the case of all concerns in stimulating the
kind of investment which starts expansion and improves the ability of
the enterprise to attract funds from the outside. A similar principle
might be applied to the personal income tax. In the case of this tax there
is conflict between the community's interest in the principle of ability to
pay and its interest in expansion. Stiff surtaxes greatly reduce the
marginal efficiency of any investments made by large income recipients.
These surtaxes are in conflict with prevailing theories of liquidity
preference. It would not be necessary to repeal the surtaxes. The at-
tractiveness of uncertain ventures to large income recipients (or even
persons in the middle brackets), could be increased by a substantial
reduction in the surtax on that part of income invested in non-refunding
equities.26
The ability of the community to supply itself with enterprise will
depend also upon the organization of the capital market. At the present
time this is in a state of flux, partly because of recent legislation and
partly because changes in the tax system require that machinery be
developed for obtaining venture capital from income brackets which
have provided little of it. It is important to realize that neither the
volume of investment opportunities nor the volume of investment-
seeking funds is fixed. Each is the result of discovery and of effort. It
26 The effect of the tax upon production plans depends in substantial measure upon


#### Split:
whether enterprises are discounting increases or decreases in taxes. Post-war adjustments
will be greatly assisted if enterprises are discounting decreases in taxes. Certainly the
prospect of tax reductions was an important stimulus to business during the five years
following the First World War. If one may assume post-war federal budgets not in excess
of 14 to 15 billion dollars a year, the prospect of reduction in taxes would be good.