of the very top groups would be higher and that those of the groups
below the top would all be significantly lower than a low countrywide
income average. This is even more likely to be true of the distribution
of income net of direct taxes and inclusive of free government benefits.
But whether a high probability weight can be attached to this conjecture
is a matter for further study.
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, I assume that it is true:
that the secular income structure is somewhat more unequal in under-
developed countries than in the more advanced-particularly in those
of Western and Northern Europe and their economically developed
descendants in the New World (the United States, Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand). This conclusion has a variety of important impli-
cations and leads to some pregnant questions, of which only a few can
be stated here.
In the first place, the wider inequality in the secular income structure
of underdeveloped countries is associated with a much lower level of
average income per capita. Two corollaries follow-and they would
follow even if the income inequalities were of the same relative range
in the two groups of countries. First, the impact is far sharper in the
underdeveloped countries, where the failure to reach an already low
countrywide average spells much greater material and psychological
misery than similar proportional deviations from the average in the
richer, more advanced countries. Second, positive savings are obviously
possible only at much higher relative income levels in the underdeveloped
countries: if in the more advanced countries some savings are possible
in the fourth quintile, in the underdeveloped countries savings could be
realized only at the very peak of the income pyramid, say by the top
5 or 3 per cent. If so, the concentration of savings and of assets is even
more pronounced than in the developed countries; and the effects of
such concentration in the past may serve to explain the peculiar charac-
teristics of the secular income structure in underdeveloped countries
today.
The second implication is that this unequal income structure pre-
sumably coexisted with a low rate of growth of income per capita. The
underdeveloped countries today have not always lagged behind the
presently developed areas in level of economic performance; indeed,
some of the former may have been the economic leaders of the world in
the centuries preceding the last two. The countries of Latin America,
Africa, and particularly those of Asia, are underdeveloped today be-
cause in the last two centuries, and even in recent decades, their rate of
economic growth has been far lower than that in the Western World—
and low indeed, if any growth there was, on a per capita basis. The
underlying shifts in industrial structure, the opportunities for internal