fying the acquisitive urge and the drive for power. The workers have
a new sense of their own strength, they are determined to have a
higher standard of living, and the indications are that they are going
to get it. It is not to be expected that organized labor will invariably
use its power with any more forbearance, fairness, and public spirit
than big business formerly used its power, or than certain agricultural
organizations have of late been using theirs.
I see no reason to suppose that the workers are less selfish than
anybody else. But organized labor will gradually come to maturity.
Parallel to the change in the temper and the public spirit of business
leaders, there is in process a significant improvement in the leadership
of labor. The great drawback is that labor leaders will not always
be able to prevent precipitate action on the part of rank-and-file mem-
bership, any more than clear-sighted and constructively thinking busi-
ness leaders can control the operations of their fellow business men.
We cannot abolish selfishness. But selfishness can be socialized.
Human nature can change for the better in the future, as it has in the
past. Men will continue to progress in social responsibility, as they
certainly have progressed since the days of rugged individualism. Both
labor and capital will increasingly understand that in a democratic
world, group interests can be moulded only in the matrix of the tran-
scendent interests of the whole people. More powerful, however,
than any purely "moral" forces will be the inner logic of private
enterprise itself. Whether private enterprise can survive permanently
depends on how well its leaders understand the logic of its own
processes, and how willing they are to heed the fact that that logic
requires, for the continuity and the over-all efficiency of the system,
certain far-reaching internal structural and functional changes.
Basic Changes Needed in the System of Private Enterprise
Three basic changes will in the long run prove inescapable: first,
some method of providing the inter-industry control and coördination
now lacking; second, a wider distribution of consumer income and
purchasing power; third, and corollary to the second, progressive de-
cline in cumulative saving and investment.
Inter-industry coördination. That child of the business men's brain,
the N.R.A., on which the Supreme Court practiced a merciful eutha-
nasia, would have failed in any case. Not only was it based on a phi-
losophy of imperfect competition, price maintenance, and restriction
of output, but it aimed only at infra-industry order and control. Of
inter-industry coördination there was no hint, and the N.R.A. was
powerless to secure it. With all its trade and manufacturers' associa-
tions, chambers of commerce, and committees for economic develop-