12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
compatible with the economic way of thinking is a socialism based pre-
ponderately upon individual free choice of consumption, of occupa-
tion, of other matters expressible upon markets.¹¹
These reflections apply to what is called "economic planning." In the
first place, "planning" falls victim to the same ambiguity which put in
its appearance with the concepts of optimum. Some planning is, and
some is not, compatible with the maximizing of the field of individual
free choice. Some planning signifies the formation of institutions such
as the International Monetary Fund, which was designed-at least
in some notable respects-to restore free-market processes. Planning in
another sense, such as the agricultural price-parity program, is well
calculated to undermine market processes and make the economy sub-
ject solely to political forces. All too often planning of this variety is
defended as "welfare economics," although it negates economics and
ignores the loss of welfare imposed upon the economy as a whole by the
gain of a special segment. It is impossible to oppose "planning” if it
simply means forethought, consistency, and rational provision for con-
tingencies in public policy; but very often the term simply covers the
growth of political decision at the expense of the economic calculus.
A totalitarian state, or a society dominated by power-blocs of labor,
agriculture, and industry cannot give expression to the economic cal-
culus. Economics is necessarily a matter fundamentally of individual
choice and it is thus necessarily also libertarian and individualistic.
Authoritarian societies will gladly bid farewell to the economic way of
thinking. But not only will personal liberty have taken leave, but also
the processes by which the individual secures from his limited resources
the best satisfaction of his individual wants. It would not be the century
of the common man.
11
Bequest of property as the basis for someone's else living in idleness would indeed
disappear; but this is not a serious limitation of free choice, since dead men cannot choose.
