10
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
tion again in his remarks on the United States in his recently published
volume of essays, Changing Concepts of Time, whose subtitle might
well have been "Washington, the Third Rome?"
There is no suggestion that the problems he was concerned with are
new problems or again, that his use of communications studies as a
means of understanding different cultures and economies is uncommon
among social scientists. What he did do in his examination of the com-
munications networks of empires, the means or mechanisms by which
ideas, information, orders, commands, are given or exchanged, was to
give the whole a strongly historical twist or bent and in doing so to
greatly enlarge the area of enquiry both in space and in time.
As I have indicated, there is a close and logical connection between
his recent work on communications and his earlier studies in Canadian
economic history. How he came to shift from concern with trade and
staples to the stability conditions of empires is one of the few questions
relating to his work in which a simple explanation seems to be adequate.
As he put it in conversation, he set out to adapt the work of J. M.
Clark and Thorstein Veblen to his own field of historical investigation--
technology and the price system-unused capacity as a factor in eco-
nomic history-and developed in the process tools which he put to
highly profitable use. He employed these with great effect in his studies
of the fisheries, the fur and timber trades, canal and railway develop-
ments, the wheat economy of the prairies and the early industrialism of
central Canada. It was when he turned to the new and more complex
industrialism of hydro-electric power, pulp and paper, and new metals,
that he felt the need of broadening his concepts, sharpening the old
tools and devising new ones.
More immediately, it was in his study of the pulp and paper industry
that he was driven to consider that primary medium of communication,
the newspaper, and its place in economic development. A reading of his
articles on the newsprint industry and the press will bring out, I think,
the growing recognition on his part that in all his work communications
had been, in fact, the unifying theme and that to continue in this direc-
tion he had no recourse but to turn to the study of history of media of
communications, their timing and their impact. In short, study of
communications seemed to be the most effective approach to an under-
standing of the larger environment of economic activity, and although
he seemed to be moving a long way from matters normally the concern
of economic historians, the economic element was never overlooked or
forgotten.
It was not much more than a decade ago that he embarked on this
new venture, and his work over this period bears witness to his
prodigious labors and his almost frightening self-sacrifice. When I ex-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
