SCHUMPETER: SCIENCE AND IDEOLOGY
355
not stand the test of analytic controls. And, in fact, as his analytic
work matured, Marx not only elaborated many pieces of scientific
analysis that were neutral to that vision but also some that did not
agree with it well-for instance, he got over the kind of underconsump-
tion and the kind of overproduction theories of crises which he seems
to have accepted at first and traces of which-to puzzle interpreters-
remained in his writings throughout. Other results of his analysis he
introduced by means of the device of retaining the original-ideo-
logical statement as an "absolute" (i.e., abstract) law while admitting
the existence of counteracting forces which accounted for deviating
phenomena in real life. Some parts of the vision, finally, took refuge
in vituperative phraseology that does not affect the scientific elements
in an argument. For instance, whether right or wrong, his exploitation
theory of "surplus" value was a genuine piece of theoretical analysis.
But all the glowing phrases about exploitation could have been at-
tached just as well to other theories, Böhm-Bawerk's among them:
imagine Böhm-Bawerk in Marx's skin, what could have been easier
for him than to pour out the vials of his wrath on the infernal practice
of robbing labor by means of deducting from its product a time
discount?
But some elements of his original vision—in particular the increasing
misery of the masses which was what was to goad them into the final
revolution that were untenable were at the same time indispensable
for him. They were too closely linked to the innermost meaning of
his message, too deeply rooted in the very meaning of his life, to be
ever discarded. Moreover, they were what appealed to followers and
what called forth their fervent allegiance. It was they which explain
the organizing effect-the party-creating effect-of what without them
would have been stale and lifeless. And so we behold in this case the
victory of ideology over analysis: all the consequences of a vision that
turns into a social creed and thereby renders analysis sterile.
Keynes' vision the source of all that has been and is more or less
definitely identified as Keynesianism-appeared first in a few thought-
ful paragraphs in the introduction to the Consequences of the Peace
(1920). These paragraphs created modern stagnationism—stagnation-
ist moods had been voiced, at intervals, by many economists before,
from Britannia Languens on (1680)—and indicate its essential fea-
tures, the features of mature and arteriosclerotic capitalist society that
tries to save more than its declining opportunities for investment can
absorb. This vision never vanished again-we get another glimpse of
it in the tract on Monetary Reform and elsewhere but, other problems
absorbing Keynes' attention during the 1920's, it was not implemented
analytically until much later. D. H. Robertson in his Banking Policy
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:00:45 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
