6
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
quiry (1934), the Manitoba Royal Commission on Adult Education
(1946), and the Dominion Royal Commission on Transportation
(1948-50). While his direct participation in the making of public
policy was limited, he was deeply concerned and not uninfluential. But
certain important attitudes should be noted. First, there was the duty
of the scholar to the University to maintain his integrity, his independ-
ence, his continued questioning. He was suspicious of scholars who
played too large a part in public affairs. Second, his concern was not
with the present—“real, insistent and complex”-not with months and
years but with generations. One of the most dangerous trends of the
time was that "foreshortening of practical prevision," which was illus-
trated by the readiness to accept Keynes's quip, "In the long run we are
all dead." Third, there was the danger of a growing readiness to grasp
at "solutions." "As an economist,” he once said, “I am constantly faced
with the extraordinary difficulty and complexity of the social sciences
and constantly forced to admit defeat. If an economist becomes certain
of the solution of any problem he can be equally certain that his solution
is wrong." Finally, what particularly appalled him was readiness to find
solutions in planning and regimentation. There is a speech he made
before the Board of Evangelism and Social Service of the United
Church of Canada which contains much that I would like to quote;
from it I select these passages:
The discussion of questions which affect people's lives must be carried
on with great circumspection. I have had occasion recently to come in
contact with two professions, the nursing and medical profession, and to
be impressed again with the assumption that a long period of intensive
training is essential to the preparation of individuals who are to be con-
cerned throughout their careers with the handling of problems affecting
people's lives. I have been appalled on the other hand and by comparison
with the cavalier fashion in which great numbers of people discuss the
problems of managing people's lives with almost no intensive training.
Dale Carnegie's How to Make Friends and Influence People is a symptom
of a widespread interest in the technique of pushing people around. In uni-
versities the rise of the social sciences and in particular the emphasis on
business subjects, personnel management, industrial relations, social work,
applied anthropology and so on point to the danger of forgetting that
no one can undertake the task of pushing people around without a long
period of intensive discipline and training, though in fairness it should
be said there is a widespread appreciation of this danger.
Later in the same speech he said:
I have indicated the physician and the nurse as types of special disciplines
that are necessary, people who respect the individual and know when to
leave him alone, but first of all they know their subject thoroughly. But
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
