HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
9
change of ideas or information, there is no suggestion of a break or loss
of continuity in thought or interests.
Another element of continuity in his work is apparent in his set of
values, or more loosely, his likes and dislikes. There stands out in every
phase of his activity-writings, lectures, departmental administration-
an intense individualism, an almost obsessive preoccupation with the
virtues of unrestrained exchange (whether reference be to commodities
or ideas) the spirit of free enquiry, the give-and-take of spontaneous
discussion, faith in the creative powers of the individual left alone.
There is the suggestion of “ideal type" method in his writings on the
aggressive commercialism of the New England fisheries and trade in
the North Atlantic and in his frequent references to the oral tradition of
Greece.
This attitude may be illustrated from his writings and is perhaps most
clearly brought out in his dislike, even contempt, for the written tradi-
tion, his fear of the written word as frozen, final; throughout there is
apparent a constant struggle to break down this finality and to weaken
or destroy the inherent tendency to monopoly of communications which
he firmly believed to be a fatal defect of the written form. This helps
to account for the absence of final or complete statement in his publica-
tions, his impatience with orderly presentation or the continuous de-
velopment of narrative, his technique of juxtaposing unlike elements as
a means of seeking insights into process. He searched, probed, sought
elements of strength and weakness, but nowhere gives any indication
of interest in constructing a system, or a theory of historical change.
Along with this individualism went an equally intense realism. There
is no lack of awareness of the weakness of small units, of maritime areas
faced with the power of continents, or of the limitations of the city state.
In the main his work centers on the history of bureaucracies, adminis-
trative units in control of large territories, in short, empires in which
centralized control of communications has been the rule rather than the
exception. How to reconcile his set of values with the survival needs of
large power structures was for him one of the crucial questions to be
asked of history. He first raised this question, I think, in his study of
the Northwest Company, a transcontinental fur trade organization,
which in its failure to achieve a balance necessary to reconciliation of
the demands of enterprising individuals in the trade with the stability
requirements of the organization, bowed out to a power more successful
in its handling of the problem. The same question is writ large in his
reflections on the values of Greece in the world of Rome, and although
little of this has appeared in print, in his frequent references to the
amazing survival powers of the Byzantine Empire. He raises the ques-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
