was certainly not true after the New Dealers had once been allowed to
get their hands on the economy. (It is only fair to state that I was one
of the economists who advised the government during the first years of
the New Deal.) The measures which the New Deal brought into being
in agriculture, in industry and in monetary and budgetary policy were
generally denounced by conservative businessmen and orthodox economists
as inconsistent with the principles of laissez-faire capitalism. It
was earnestly argued that if continued they were bound to destroy both
democracy and capitalism.
A decade later I made a staff study, for the Committee for Economic
Development, on the relation between foreign trade and domestic employment
in connection with the possibilities of removing barriers to
international trade. A comparison between international trade under
the assumption of exchange between free economies, and international
trade under the assumption of exchange between free economies, on the
one hand, with stated-controlled economies, on the other, thus became
relevant. Could we, however, speak of an economy as being free if the
government permitted monopolistic arrangements within the various
industries of the country? Some of our American industrialists in
C.E.D. insisted that in this sense the British economy was no longer a
free enterprise economy by the time of the outbreak of World War II,
due to the wide-scale development of trade associations and cartel-type
arrangements, towards which the Conservative government of the
United Kingdom took quite a benevolent attitude. By contrast they
argued that our economy was a free economy because of our antitrust
legislation and its administration and the general spirit of free enterprise
among American industrialists.
Some of the economists associated with C.E.D. decided to see what
some of the young British economists who represented their government
in wartime Washington would have to say to this. Consequently,
we invited a number of them to dinner. When the question was first put
to them, they refused to confirm the thesis that British industry was not
characteristically competitive. Indeed they never did explicitly so agree.
Finally, however, one of their number said: "Well, to tell the truth I
think there is a good deal to the thesis. Domestically it would not be
true to say that British industry was essentially competitive by the time
World War II broke out. However, that does not mean that competition
would not exist on the international market for steel, for example, since
the British steel industry would still be competing with the German,
the French and the American steel industries."
We had also invited Gunnar Myrdal, who was in this country at
that time, to the meeting. He said to me, “It may be true that
even though domestic competition had disappeared some sort of competition