in greater measure than associated external economies (if any). It
prompts examination not merely of effects associated with short-run
allocation and partially offsetting responses to disadvantages of population
growth, but also of the longer-run consequences of alternative
uses of inputs transformable into population. It reveals how population
growth and megalopolitan concentration tend to bureaucratize society
and dissipate individual autonomy [32].

The optimum concept has been applied to cities as well as to national
populations, though with even less success, because of the heterogeneity
of cities. Some attention is also being directed to the advantages
and disadvantages of city growth. Much of the work currently done on
cities amounts to little more than empiricist inquiry, insensitive to the
manner in which distortion of exchange in the urban realm, especially
distortion of key exchanges, may distort the urban structure and impose
suboptimal conditions of existence upon the passive majority.
Turning from optima to change in population composition, we find
two dimensions of increasing concern. The first is age structure.
France's population was the first to shed the child-ridden Oriental age
structure common to populations in Malthus's day. Modern age structures,
together with increases in the proportion of the population over
60-65 years, are concomitants of relatively low fertility; prolongation
of life, unless beyond 70, affects this proportion very little. Of course,
should it be forgotten that death is essential to progress and should
man become immortal, a really Struldbruggian society could develop.
For then, given a Gross Reproduction Rate of 1.5, the proportion over
60 would approach 41.4 per cent [11, p. 40]. There would still be a
way of escape, however; for, by raising the GRR to 3.0, the proportion
aged 60 and over could be held to 9.1 per cent. Man would thus be
faced with a choice-between life in a nursing home and life in a sardine
can. Fortunately, the bad as well as the good still die, though perhaps
in suboptimal proportion. There is need for hardheaded socioeconomic
gerontological inquiry into the allocation, employment, income,
and related implications of a doubling or more of the fraction of the
population over 60 or 65 years since (say) 1870 when only about 5 per
cent of the males were 65 or older and many of these lived in nonurban
areas.

Perhaps the central economic task flowing from this aging is that of
optimizing, over the life span of the representative individual, of his
work-time and his discretionary time. Presumably, this arrangement
would result in greater vacation time than now-say six weeks per
year and deferment of retirement until age 70. Such arrangement is
currently threatened by corporate, trade union, and governmental bureaucrats
who, abhorring discriminating decision as the devil abhors