KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
21
- patience and fortitude. Almsgiving tended to mean supporting the
clergy and endowing religious foundations, while an uncertain fraction
went to relieve poverty (real or feigned) and that did an uncertain
amount of good-certainly made little impression on poverty as a
whole. Modern society has largely shifted the load of relief from the
family and local group, which can no longer so well bear it, or be made
to, and centralized it more and more on the national government
through progressive income and inheritance taxation. A vast improve-
ment has come about, chiefly through assuring to poor children sup-
port and some equipment for earning a livelihood, with family limita-
tion offsetting improved sanitation and medical care. This of course
does not meet either ideal requirements or the popular demand-per-
haps even social necessity considering, again, the children, now future
citizen-voters as well as producers of more children, and soldiers. But
specialists seem to agree that taxation, for peace uses, can be pushed
further very gradually at best, if the practical limit has not already
been approached, at least for a government that is not to employ powers
incompatible with basic freedoms. So what? I have no answer to that
one, especially for the crucial matter of how far society can allow
free production of children and agree to support them "decently" and
of necessity their parents along with them. But the classes that pro-
duce babies can outvote those that prefer "substance and culture" to
large families, particularly if the latter are soft-hearted and encourage
them to demand "justice." Moreover, the prolific can muster the larger
armies, and perhaps the tougher too, where the distinction conforms to
national areas; and it is here the conflict between freedom and equali-
tarian justice now is the great world menace.
With no pretense that my message is a cheering one, I can only, in
the interest of what seems to me plain truth, go on to emphasize the
difficulties of our problems and the danger of action that will make
things worse instead of better. As is now evident, the “liberal” nine-
teenth century, following the rationalistic eighteenth, was wrong in its
view that mere individual liberty, religious-intellectual, political and
economic, would yield well-being and happiness. It did indeed accom-
plish wonders, supplemented by the kind of state action accepted by its
original advocates. And people seem much more actively dissatisfied
than before. J. S. Mill's Political Economy and Marx-Engels' Com-
munist Manifesto appeared almost simultaneously in the middle of the
"wonderful century," wonderful especially for the common man. But
Mill was very critical of the institution of property; and the Manifesto
called on the workers of the world to unite for the violent overthrow
of all pre-existing social order, because "you have nothing to lose but
your chains." Madness, criminal madness, of course; but how many of
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:04:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
