farm real estate prices over the narrowest range. The other difficulty
is that some of the nonfarm assets are difficult to measure and hence
are not represented in the totals, so that the percentages in the third
column are all a little high. It is a large enough sample, however, so
that it indicates change pretty accurately.
We can probably safely say that at least a good fifth of the tan-
gible productive assets of the nation are still in agriculture, as against
only one-tenth of the labor force. Agriculture's share increased sharply
in the war years whereas it had been dropping steadily before 1930. In
1910, the United States was still two-fifths agricultural in terms of pro-
ductive assets. The next two decades saw this two-fifths reduced almost
to one-fifth. The first world war contributed to this, and then the great
surge in the electrical and automotive industries in the 1920's. The low
levels of farm real estate prices in the 1920's and up till 1940 were also
a strong factor in the relative decline of agriculture's share in these
decades. But from 1930 to 1940 the nonfarm component was almost
stagnant. The advance in the farm component from 1940 to 1950 in-
cluded a doubling in constant dollars of the investment in machinery
and motor vehicles. Farm real estate prices per acre rose the same as the
price level. The relative decrease in agriculture's share since 1945 is due
to the great burst in industrial and urban expansion that set in after the
war and early postwar years. This effort was centered on military out-
put during the war. The farm component can be expected to decline still
further in the next two decades.
Per person in the labor force, productive farm assets in 1950 and
since have been around 2.5 times those in the nonfarm sector, as com-
pared with about 1.6 times back in 1910. In the two decades following
1910, the farm and nonfarm productive assets per worker came pretty
nearly into balance as a result of the rapid industrialization and mech-
anization of our country in that period. The sharp reversal to 2.6 times
the productive nonfarm assets per worker came in only the twelve years
from 1940 to 1952. The mechanization of farming and the accompany-
ing decline in the farm labor force account for most of this.
If the assets per worker were figured in terms of the number of
workers including off-farm workers, given in the third column of Table
I, they would be $11,000 instead of the $13,630 in Table II. The true
figure is part way between these. But the course of change over the
decades would be very little different.
Comparing the changes in percentage of the labor force in agriculture
in Table I with the changes in Table II in percentage of total produc-
tive assets in agriculture over the whole period from 1910 to 1955
thus brings out one sharp difference, namely, that whereas the two
series declined together to 1940, the farm labor percentage then dropped