DOUGLAS: ARE THERE LAWS OF PRODUCTION?
5
that both of these two widely conflicting doctrines have been taught
within our economics departments with little effort made by either
set of protagonists to determine the relative truth of either, or their
compatability. So far has this confusion of doctrine gone, that I have
known professors, who teaching both theory and labor economics,
have instilled the pure doctrine of John Bates Clark during one hour,
and then during the next hour have taught as economic gospel the
bargain theories of Sidney and Beatrice Webb!
The effect upon our students of this dualism in the winds of doctrine
has been most unfortunate. It has caused some to shrug their shoulders
and to dismiss all economic teaching with the words of Omar, so be-
loved by sophomores,
Myself when young, did eagerly frequent
Doctor and Saint, and heard great argument
About it and about; but evermore
Came out by the same door where in I went.
Others, like chameleons, have given diametrically different answers
to identical questions, depending on which instructor asked them.
But to every candidate for the Ph.D. degree, there has loomed the
nightmare of that dreaded hour when in his oral examination, he must
face both sets of teachers and know that the answers which would be
judged right by one school would be judged wrong by the other. Such
a state of affairs is at once both ridiculous and scandalous, and as
long as it continues, there is little hope for scientific progress or even
sound mental health among economists.
But within the ranks of the theorists themselves, a serious intel-
lectual slovenliness, unfortunately, set in. Convinced that the marginal
productivity curves of the factors were negatively inclined, they con-
tented themselves with drawing the curves as sloping downwards and
to the right, but took apparently little interest in trying to determine
what the positions and slopes of these curves actually were. Thus I
have seen an experienced instructor on successive days draw widely
differing marginal productivity curves for labor, one declining very
gradually, one at an angle of 45°, and the third plunging sharply
downward. Moreover, this instructor gave every evidence of not
realizing that there was any significant difference between these curves
nor did he indicate whether he was drawing the curves upon an
arithmetic or a double logarithmic scale. Indeed, the slope of the
curve seemed to be determined partly by chance, partly by the stance
of the instructor, and partly by the degree to which he happened to
bend his arm!
The orthodox theorists may urge in self defense that they do not
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:59:33 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
