16
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
tant is to actually start and carry through a research project. A uni-
versity colleague who has won fame as a novelist once told me: "Writers
are of two kinds. One kind are those who plan and talk about writing;
the others those who sit down at the typewriter and write." Having
reached an age when most of my career is behind me, I recognize how
little I have accomplished and say to my friends: “Avoid my mistake
of putting off planned research and writing." With age, enthusiasm
wanes, as does energy. Studies which do not get beyond the planning
stage are but seldom worth anything, and unfinished studies rarely can
be completed by anyone else. A scholar will always share knowledge
with others, but the man who has done the research is likely to be the
man best qualified to interpret it and to carry it to completion.
In common with most others who have discussed the subject, it is my
conviction that economists should be encouraged to engage in research.
Similarly, I believe that it is desirable that they should get practical
experience in business and/or government, with the idea of later return-
ing to teaching. I hold these views, in part, because I believe that re-
search and practical experience are broadening and enrich teaching. I
also believe that we need to find solutions for many economic problems
to insure the further and rapid progress we ought to have.
I would direct much of this research to public policy questions. Par-
ticularly valuable, I believe, is field research. It is important for econo-
mists early to realize that not everything worth knowing about eco-
nomics and practical public policy questions is to be found in books, or
can be grasped by thinking about problems in a swivel chair, or arrived
at by solving mathematical equations based on unproven assumptions.
The advice John R. Commons always gave his students: "Do not only
read and think but observe" is as valuable today as it was when I studied
with him as a graduate student. Besides furnishing training in gathering
original information, field research should prove most helpful in the dis-
covery of new truths and in sweeping away unfounded beliefs.
Not everybody has talents which will bring fame in research. But I am
of the opinion that useful economic research can be done by many more
economists than do any research. Many of the practical problems of the
day are narrower than the weighty matters principally discussed in
meetings like this. Ph.D. theses are supposed to be original pieces of
research and quite a few are creditable examples. However, it is tragic
that many of the authors of these theses never complete any similar
studies or publish anything. Subjects for profitable research are all
about us. No practical question is too unimportant to merit study. The
beginner, as well as the economist who gets no foundation or other
financial support, is probably well advised to tackle problems which
seem to him to be quite small. Usually, as small problems are studied
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:14:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
