farms of sufficient acreage. The cost of bringing very much of this land
into the uses suited to it-dominantly hay and pasture-and of employing
the new technologies is far less than that of reclaiming new
land in the regions of scanty rainfall.
The rational program for these low-income areas is, therefore, to
help the better farm families among them to take over the land being
abandoned by the rest and thus enlarge their farms as needed, and at
the same time to improve their present land plus that acquired, and
to apply the new technologies to it. What is required for the longoverdue
reconstruction of the agriculture of the low-income areas is
primarily a much expanded program of helping the farm families in
these areas to work out plans for developing the resources already
in their farms and for buying additional land if this is needed, and for
obtaining credit on the right terms. It will be mostly intermediateterm
credit or real-estate mortgage credit. In either case, the loans
should be of the budgeted or open-end type so that the loans can be
enlarged year by year in the earlier years and then paid off year by
year later. The necessary private and public agencies to furnish this
credit are already in existence, but the Farm and Home Administration
needs much larger financing than in the recent past. An extra pair of
extension workers is needed in each of the low-income counties to
specialize in the planning work on their low-income farms.
At the same time, the provision of education and medical services
for these areas needs to be much improved. To tax the incomes of our
city population to help provide this better education and health for
areas that are going to provide many of their future citizens is not in the
least unreasonable. Such education and health aids, plus access to
modern communications, will presently help greatly in keeping down
the size of families in these backward areas. The improved education
and communication will facilitate out-migration.
The foregoing is far from a full outline of the needed programs for
agriculture. Credit financing is needed for other than low-income
farmers, particularly for young men ready to start as farm operators—
the "future farmers of America," upon whom depends the quality of
the farming in the next generation. Also our leasing systems need to be
revised so as to make it advantageous for both landlord and tenant to
conserve and even improve the farms which they jointly operate.
V. The Pure Politics of It
It will not take long to present the main political aspects of the
problem we are dealing with. You have already been told how what was
conceived as an adjustment program around 1930 and got embodied
in large measure in the Act that Congress passed in 1933 called the