WITTE: ECONOMICS AND PUBLIC POLICY
19
nomics, field study seems to me well-nigh indispensable in the training
of graduate students. If it can be guided so that the professor and the
students work together on the same problems, an almost ideal relation-
ship between teachers and students can be created.
These suggestions, I know, add to the work required of teachers of
economics, in "handling" the large numbers of students the near future
will bring. But few other efforts can be so rewarding in personal satis-
factions, influence exerted, and friendships formed.
The increasing demands which teaching is making upon the academic
economists operate to make incidental research more difficult. Even
more they furnish an excuse to many for not attempting any original
studies. On the other hand, far more funds from foundations and other
sources are becoming available for research leaves for studies at home
and abroad. Opportunities for temporary employment in government
have not increased and many conditions continue to make government
service unattractive. Employment by business with the idea of later
returning to teaching offers increasing opportunities, but is subject to
the drawback that it is hard to give up the larger business salaries. All
told, however, opportunities for full-time research are distinctly better
than ever before.
I am of the opinion that academic economists should go on research
leaves when they have opportunity to do so and have a subject in which
they are vitally interested and to the study of which it seems they can
profitably devote a year or so. Generally, both the recipients of the
grants and the institutions giving them a leave, will profit from such
interruptions of academic teaching. But the recipients have a heavy
obligation to complete the studies they undertake, in fairness to the don-
ors and their own institutions, to say nothing about the harm they other-
wise do to their reputations and to the profession.
Besides full-time leaves for research, I strongly believe in the study of
original problems by teachers of economics on a part-time basis and
even without any time allowances-although these are desirable. By
some, such research can profitably be directed toward the theoretical
aspects of economics. More generally, I believe, it can best be devoted
to questions of practical public policy and to studies of the historical,
institutional, and factual background of economic problems. There are
many more problems in this domain with which the part-time researcher
can hope to deal successfully than in the theoretical field.
There are serious difficulties which the would-be researcher must
overcome. An obvious difficulty is that of finding the time for research,
confronted, as are most economists, with overloaded teaching programs.
There is also the problem that there are too few publication outlets for
economic research, particularly on applied practical subjects. A very
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:14:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
