The American Economic Review
VOLUME XLII
MARCH, 1952
NUMBER ONE
AN ECONOMIST'S CONFESSIONS*
By JOHN H. WILLIAMS
I
One advantage of a presidential address is that one can appear on our
program with a topic of his own choosing. It is however a dubious ad-
vantage. As I have proceeded with the job of program making (and I
am sure my predecessors will testify to what an arduous job it is), I
have been asked what topic I was reserving for myself. But programs
are not made in that way, and as one works on a program so extensive
as ours, he is apt to find that he has assigned about all the topics that
interest him, and that, far from having reserved anything, his question
becomes what can he possibly find to say that does not trespass too
much on others.
I have decided to make mine a kind of personal confession. I came
into economics at a later age than most, with virtually no undergradu-
ate training in it and after several years of college teaching in a dif-
ferent field. Yet I had had for some time a genuine, if quite untutored,
interest in some of the economic problems of the times, and before
entering the Graduate School I carefully scanned the catalogue. I think
I have never fully recovered from the shock of having practically all
my choices crossed out, partly on the ground that some of the things
that had seemed important to me were by then thoroughly understood
and agreed upon by professional economists-I could read about them
later and even more on the ground that one must have a thorough in-
doctrination in “theory” before doing anything with "applied fields" or
special "problems."
I am not criticizing my advisers and, now that I am somewhat in-
doctrinated, I would probably give similar advice. This experience,
* Presidential address delivered at the Sixty-fourth Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, Boston, December 27, 1951.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:07:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
