12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
leading, or are we merely the victims of our changing environment, des-
perately hanging on and seeking, after the event, to rationalize as best
we can? I have spent a good part of my life, half inside and half out-
side the university, but trying in both places to deal with questions
of economic policy. My difficulties may be due in part to an innate atti-
tude of mind, which seems always to have included a vein of skepticism,
and a desire to try to look all round a problem rather than to plunge
forthwith for the bold solution. But the real point of my paper is that,
as I think, the difficulties are largely due to the kinds of reservations
I have been making about the dependability of theory as a guide to
policy.
In any event, I cannot remember when policy questions did not pre-
sent themselves to me as dilemmas, which I would have to go outside
formal theory to try to get my bearings on, and even then would find
very heavy going. About the practical usefulness of theory, I have often
felt like the man who stammered and finally learned to say, “Peter
Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers," but found it hard to work
into conversation. I will not discuss whether this attitude of mind makes
for good or bad policy making. Probably we need a mixture of minds
and temperaments and biases to function effectively. But I will say that
I think the most dangerous policy maker is the man who knows the
answer, because he feels he can take it literally from his theory.
VI
I had not meant in this paper to deal primarily with specific ques-
tions of policy, but some comments may have illustrative significance.
We are again living in a period of revolutionary economic change. In
the domestic field, I have been mainly interested in monetary and fiscal
policy. I am hopeful that the sessions on these subjects in our present
program will add to our understanding, and I hope too that the forth-
coming Patman sub-committee hearings, following on those of the
Douglas sub-committee two years ago, will throw further light on the
interrelated postwar problems of monetary control and debt manage-
ment.
But I must confess that, despite all the discussion and the accumu-
lated experience here and abroad since the First World War, this range
of problems still impresses me as being one of the great dilemmas, po-
litical as well as economic. There are few economists today who favor
unadulterated laissez faire. But about the kind and degree of interven-
tion there is endless debate. In our kind of economy-apart from war
or defense the main emphasis has been on general monetary and fiscal
controls. But central banking in its heyday did not prevent the booms
of the 'twenties or the Great Depression of the early 'thirties. The re-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:07:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
