6
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
barter loomed large compared with pecuniary exchange. In parts of the
present-day world, and even in some parts of modern life, these non-
pecuniary areas are by no means negligible, and they are capable of
expansion under stress of depression or war. Victory gardens present
one striking example. Moreover, where consumers possess large stocks
of durable and semidurable consumer goods, consumption expenditures
may shrink or expand materially without affecting current consumption
in any comparable degree. It is a serious blunder to confuse consumption
expenditures with consumption, and to infer that changes in either
income or consumption expenditures, however deflated, imply corre-
sponding changes in the plane of living.
Consumption levels are profoundly influenced by changing consump-
tion standards, but are by no means identical with them. The consump-
tion standard of an individual or group is the consumption level that is
earnestly desired and eagerly striven for, in respect of quantities,
qualities, and proportions of the various goods consumed or wanted
for consumption. In the Western World, the consumption standard is
typically above the consumption level proper; but it is not an ideal
or a mere dream. Nor can it safely be raised, even for future applica-
tion, too far above the level actually attainable. We court disillusion-
ment and frustration if we inflate our consumption standards for the
post-war period to the point of insuring failure to approach them.
The consumption standard actually held by an individual or group,
its very own standard, must be sharply distinguished from those de-
vised by outsiders-legal, expert, or otherwise. Such external or norma-
tive standards typically refer only to particular components, not to the
entire consumption level. Sometimes they are legal minima, as in the
fields of education and housing. Sometimes they are recommended
optima, with liberal margins of safety, as are the Food and Nutrition
Board's Recommended Daily Allowances of the various nutrients.
Sometimes they are more or less well-based opinions as to what would
be "good for" the individual or group in question. The standard cost-
of-living budgets proposed by the Heller Committee of the University
of California are composites of the estimated consumption expenditure
standards of the group, padded to meet certain “standards” regarded
as objectively established and others devised by the authors.
Many such external standards can be used so as to contribute to
improvement in consumption levels. By no means all of them, how-
ever, are reliable, in general or in detail, or acceptable to the intended
beneficiaries. If applied under pressure, indeed, some may lead to a
patent imbalance in the content of living, rendering it less satisfactory
than before. In inter-war British experience, certain improvements in
