From the outset it is clear that there is a vast expanse of ground
on which there should be as little danger of ideological vitiation as
there is in physics. A time series of gross investment in manufacturing
industry may be good or bad, but whether it is the one or the other is,
normally, open to anyone to find out. The Walrasian system as it
stands may or may not admit of a unique set of solutions but whether
it does or not is a matter of exact proof that every qualified person
can repeat. Questions like these may not be the most fascinating or
practically most urgent ones but they constitute the bulk of what is
specifically scientific in our work. And they are in logic although
not always in fact neutral to ideology. Moreover, their sphere widens
as our understanding of analytic work improves. Time was when
economists thought that they were gaining or losing a point for labor
if they fought for the labor-quantity and against the marginal-utility
theory of value. It can be shown that, so far as ideologically relevant
issues are concerned, this makes as little difference as did the replacement
of the latter by the indifference-curve approach or the replacement
of the indifference curves by a simple consistency postulate
(Samuelson). I dare say that there are still some who find something
incongruous to their vision in marginal-productivity analysis. Yet it
can be shown that the latter's purely formal apparatus is compatible
with any vision of economic reality that anyone ever had.*
IV
Let us now look for ideological elements in three of the most influential
structures of economic thought, the works of Adam Smith, of
Marx, and of Keynes.
In Adam Smith's case the interesting thing is not indeed the absence
but the harmlessness of ideological bias. I am not referring to his
time- and country-bound practical wisdom about laissez-faire, free
trade, colonies and the like for-it cannot be repeated too often-a
man's political preferences and recommendations as such are entirely
beyond the range of my remarks or rather they enter this range only
so far as the factual and theoretical analysis does that is presented in
support of them. I am exclusively referring to this analytical work
* The contrary opinion that is sometimes met with is to be attributed to the simplified


#### Split:
versions of the marginal-productivity theory that survive in textbooks and do not take
into account all the restrictions to which production functions are subject in real life,
especially if they are production functions of going concerns for which a number of
technological data are, for the time being, unalterably fixed-just as in elementary
mechanics no account is taken of the complications that arise so soon as we drop the
simplifying assumption that the masses of bodies are concentrated in a single point. But
a marginal-productivity theory that does take account of restrictions which, even in
pure competition, prevent factors from being paid according to their marginal productivities
is still marginal-productivity theory.