KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
27
and spirit of pursuit and definition-freedom, but under critical direc-
tion not caprice-as the most essential value.
A further consequence is that liberalism is fact-facing above all. It
does not pretend that existing economic conditions are just, but recog-
nizes that justice can be approached but never attained, and freedom
likewise and any other social ideal in its ideal form. It just is not that
kind of world. It is childish if not hypocritical to preach that all dis-
cord is harmony not understood, that "in erring reason's spite, One
truth is clear, whatever is, is right," or accordingly, that omnipotent
goodness and omniscience rule the world. As T. H. Huxley said, the
ways of the cosmos are not our ways. Rather it is man's work to re-
make the world, as far and as fast as he can, according to his sentiments
and ideals about which the Cosmos gives no evidence of the least con-
cern and to be careful not to defeat the whole project by trying to
go too far or too fast with it. Also, to enjoy what goodness and beauty
we can find, without letting these appreciations confuse and corrupt
our judgments of truth. Any of my students or former students in the
audience will please forgive me for repeating here a statement I often
quote, from Clarence Darrow, characterizing divine justice. Said he,
"God made one man a genius and the other a fool-which always
seemed to me a raw thing for God to do-to the genius." Of course,
it is a raw thing for both of them; but the world is like that, and we
must take it or leave it. Nor is much freedom possible, either, in any
social order, and notably in the large-scale organizations, efficient and
yet constantly changing, that are required to exploit modern tech-
nology. You're in the army now, even in peacetime, especially in the
mass-production industries. You can only be reasonably free to elect
some other work, in view of the "net advantages." As to justice, other
things are distributed even less in accord with merit than wealth and
income, and we can do little against the monstrous vicissitudes and
caprices of the natural world. To secure any form of social justice,
we should have to begin with a much more equitable distribution of
parents and more remote ancestors, and manifold other circumstances
that largely determine the character of one's life long before birth.
And even when one reaches the fullest responsibility, it is possible to
have but a fraction of the knowledge necessary for really intelligent.
action. As to "happiness," it is easy to agree with Darrow, and
Meredith, and many more, that the idiot or, as Whitman put it, the
animals, have the best of it. But that happiness, at least, is not what
makes human life worth while.
We must, as I have suggested, be good sports, enjoy the game
whether we win or lose, not cheat even to win, and not even be too
