war, we have been faced with a condition of inflation, seemingly as
intractable as the deflationary conditions which found expression in
Keynes' theory. We may still argue, as many Keynesians do, that the
income equation is still as applicable as it appeared to be in the beginning.
But to my mind this is either mysticism or the familiar confusion
between an identity equation and a law. It was over this same sort
of confusion that the long controversies about the quantity-of-money
equation became so sterile. Certainly, in recent years, Keynesian economics
has been undergoing fundamental changes. We have become
dissatisfied with the “law,” as Keynes gave it to us. One form that this
has taken has been the further analysis of the consumption function.
It seems now agreed among econometricians that the “simple relation"
between income and consumption, as Keynes stated it, is unstable, and
in searching for a more complex relation which may have some promise
of greater stability various hypotheses have been introduced which
contradict Keynes' own theory. For example, liquidity is now commonly
accepted as a factor influencing consumption, whereas in
Keynes' theory it affected only investment. We have been working with
various hypotheses, including saving out of past income, liquid assets,
capital gains, the last highest income reached during a boom, expectations
of future income, and other possible factors affecting the incomeconsumption
relation. The broad fact seems to be that we have nothing
left of this basic concept of the Keynesian theory other than that consumption
is an important component of income and deserves all the
study we can give it."

One over-all criticism of Keynesian economics that seems to me
justified is that Keynes' emphasis on the demand side-his principle
of effective demand-sins quite as much in its taking for granted the
adaptability of supply as the classical economists did in their reverse
emphasis. This has interested me particularly in connection with problems
of international trade adjustment, and how to effect the grand reconciliation
between internal full-employment policies and a country's
balance-of-payments position, by some method other than mere grants
of aid. But its applicability is general and the place to begin the correction
would be in the internal economy, even if we were considering, as
Keynes mostly did, a closed economic system. Assuming, as Keynes did,
constant technique, and confining himself to short-period analysis,
with no analysis at all of economic processes-how we get from one
state of static equilibrium to another-Keynes' theory has always




#### Split:

"I have taken part of this paragraph, and some scattered comments elsewhere, from
my paper presented at our Annual Meeting in 1947, "An Appraisal of Keynesian Economics,
" Proceedings of the American Economic Association, Am. Econ. Rev., Vol.
XXXVIII, No. 2 (May, 1948), pp. 273-90.
