The coming to power of a Republican administration has indeed
slowed down and to some extent even reversed the trend towards state
intervention in the regulation of the economy, just as the enactment of
the Taft-Hartley Act somewhat reduced the economic and political
power of labor unions. Yet I do not believe that the changes in trend
which have occurred or are likely to occur would cause me to alter my
conclusion that we have in actual fact a very mixed kind of economy
rather than one characterized primarily by traditional competition and
laissez faire.

It is not easy to find a term which will be descriptive of this mixed
kind of economy. I think it might be called the "organizational economy"
to indicate the vastly increased role of industrial and financial
corporations, labor unions and farm organizations and of the largest
and most powerful of all organizations, the state, in an economy in
which competition in old and new forms nevertheless still plays a strategic
role.

As a result of the development of the organizational economy it
seems to me that industrialists, labor leaders and governmental officials
are bound to find themselves making decisions on matters which used
to be governed by the relatively impersonal operation of the free market
or which would have to be dealt with by a directing authority in a
centrally planned economy. We cannot any longer be sure that in this
current organizational economy these decisions will in their composite
effect produce equilibrium at full employment, the optimum allocation
of resources or the kind of pattern of distribution of income which
either a competitive model of an economy or a centrally planned and
administered economy would in theory produce.

A final illustration of this: An executive of one of the great pulp and
paper companies, when complimented on the good labor relations in his
industry, replied, with a sincere sense of pride: "Now-a-days the managements
of the corporations in our industry consider their basic job
to be marketing the labor embodied in our products. We try to sell this
labor embodied in pulp and paper at the best price we can get for it, in
the largest quantities practicable, without resorting to the kind of cutthroat
competition which would make it impossible for the stockholders
to get a fair return on the investment and, above all, for our labor to
earn a decent living. Some folks might indeed charge that the managements
of the companies in the industry act simply as selling agents
for our labor union."

He felt that this represented an immense public gain over the "bad
old times" when the managements of the various corporations in the
3





#### Split:

This term is cognate with the title of Kenneth E. Boulding's book, The Organizational
Revolution (New York, 1953).
