literature will have to be amended. Managerial discretion will be a
function, not of the independence of the management from the control
of the owners, but chiefly of the independence of the management from
urgent worries about the sufficiency of earnings. If one insists, one
may still say that all managers are primiarly interested in their own
incomes. But, since it is clear that their long-term incomes are jeopardized
if profits go below the acceptable rate of return, maximization of
managerial incomes and maximization of profits come to to the same
thing if competition is effective.⁹
There can be no doubt about the fact that competition is not effective
in many industries and that many, very many, firms are not exposed
to vigorous competition. It follows that managerial discretion can have
its way in a large enough number of firms to secure wide applicability
of well-designed managerial-discretion models-or to invite the use of
managerial total-utility models.
I was fully aware, when I wrote my 1946 article, that there were
many qualifications and exceptions to the principle of profit maximization.
10 But I considered it hopeless for predictive purposes to work
with total-utility maximization and I did not see the possibility of combining
a few selected managerial goals with the profit motive.
Marginalism Extended: Total Utility
9
In order to show how hopeless it is to construct a comprehensive
total-utility model and obtain from it definite predictions of the effects
of changes in conditions upon the dispositions of the managers, one
merely has to visualize the large variety of possible "satisfactions" and
the still larger variety of things that may contribute to their attain-


#### Split:
For competition to be effective it is not necessary that competition is either pure or
perfect or that all or any of the markets in which the firm buys or sells are perfect.
10 Several of my statements, if I presented them without source reference, might well be
mistaken for quotations from critics of marginalism, including behavioralists and managerialists.
Here are samples [21]: ". a business man is motivated by considerations
other than the maximization of money profits"; "it is preferable to separate the nonpecuniary
factors of business conduct from those which are regular items in the formation
of money profits" (p. 526); “one may presume that producing larger production volumes
[or] paying higher wage rates . . . than would be compatible with a maximum of money
profits may involve for the business man a gain in social prestige or a certain measure of
inner satisfaction"; "it is not impossible that considerations of this sort substantially
weaken the forces believed to be at work on the basis of a strictly pecuniary marginal
calculus"; for patriotic reasons during the war “many firms produced far beyond the point
of highest money profits"; "the conflict of interests between the hired managers and the
owners of the business" may call for “important qualifications” (p. 527); "the interest
of the former in inordinately large outlays or investments may be capable of descriptions
in terms of a pecuniary calculus, but it is not maximization of the firm's profits which
serves here as the standard of conduct" (pp. 527-28); "maximization of salaries and
bonuses of professional managers may constitute a standard of business conduct different
from that implied in the customary marginal analysis of the firm"; and "the extent to
which the two standards would result in sharply different action under otherwise similar
conditions is another open question in need of investigation" (p. 528).