Democracy, on the other hand, has encouraged free voluntary associa-
tions in the economic sphere, as well as in all other aspects of life.
Dictators regard free voluntary associations as a challenge to their
authority, while democracies regard them as instrumentalities to better
promote and safeguard individual welfare, and thereby strengthen the
entire society.
927
The American society from the outset has been one in which volun-
tary associations have played a large role. De Tocqueville, in his reveal-
ing observations on the United States in Jackson's day, 6 noted that
Americans, with all their individualism, showed a remarkable capacity
to associate with each other in their economic endeavors. Today, there
are more associations in the United States than in any other land, and
much more powerful organizations. We have nearly 500,000 business
corporations and more than 50,000 labor unions, plus many thousands
of trade associations, employers' associations, chambers of commerce,
cooperatives, farmers' associations, and other similar economic organi-
zations. Peter F. Drucker has characterized the America of today as
being "enterprise directed," and holds that enterprise "is not the crea-
ture of the State" but "has its own law and rationale in its function."
The fact that corporations differ so greatly in size and importance
makes it difficult to grasp the significance of their remarkable growth.
More than 90 per cent of the 500,000 corporations in this country are
businesses differing from those conducted by individual entrepreneurs
and partners only in the limited liability enjoyed by their owners and
the life in perpetuity accorded them by law. But a thousand or so large
corporations have very different and greater impacts on our society than
the much more numerous individual entrepreneurs, partnerships, and
small corporations. Not only do these large corporations transact
directly half or more of all business in the United States and employ
one-third of all labor in industrial employments, but they have many
thousands of stockholders, suppliers, dealers, and distributors.
The present-day great corporation, moreover, is much more than
merely a business organization. Through their public relations programs
and other publicity media, corporations profoundly affect public opinion
and in doing so also influence the outcome of political contests. In their
dealings with business organizations outside the United States and to
some extent indirectly with foreign governments, American corporations
play a large role in international affairs. Particularly abroad but also in
Alexis de Tocqueville, De la Democratie en Amerique (Brussels, 1840). Translation by
Henry Reeve, with an Introduction by Henry Steel Commanger (New York, 1947).
7 The New Society: The Anatomy of the Industrial Order (New York, 1950). See, also, A. A.
Berle, Jr., The 20th Century Capitalist Revolution (New York, 1954) and Herrymon Mauer,
Great Enterprise: Growth and Behavior of the Big Corporation (New York, 1955).