ative destruction" [24, p. 84] is a force before which monopoly must
disintegrate, and its winds bring better products, more productive
processes, more economical sources of raw materials, and more
efficient forms of business organization. Schumpeter regarded the
Great Combination Movement, which radically changed the structure
of industry at the close of the century, as a manifestation of this
perennial gale without which the full productive potentiality of capitalism
could not have been realized. Schumpeter left little place in his
scheme of things for an antitrust policy; he seemed to regard it as
a sort of sniping operation, which might annoy and embarrass businessmen
but by itself would prove powerless to stay what he regarded
as the forces of progress.
This brief résumé of the doctrines of contemporary American
economists who have concerned themselves with the functioning of a
price system characterized by monopolistic competition is, of course,
inadequate to do justice to the details of their logic, which at times is
both profound and brilliant and which has validity in its application
to some industrial situations. There is something of truth in what
each says, and much of truth in what some of them say. Their common
ground, however, is that they all think much alike with regard
to the workability of the contemporary economic system-a system
whose structure is the product of an organizational revolution that
has embraced virtually every aspect of American culture. That they
think this way is, I believe, a reflection of the influence of the
Zeitgeist on economic thinking.
But theorists concerned with industrial structure have a greater
obligation to society than to discover that its economy works well.
As political economists we should be interested in understanding the
forces that have shaped our economic system and may determine its
destiny; and we should know more about how it works than the proponents
of workable competition have told us. On the latter point we
can learn something from what corporate executives or their spokesmen
have to say on the question of power and social responsibility.
Business leaders recognize what some economists are loath to see,
and they acknowledge by indirection what economists often deny-that
the modern corporation's relative size, the scale on which it buys
and sells, and its investment policy may give it power over particular
markets or over the whole economy. Having power, corporate executives
are asking themselves what are their social responsibilities in
using it. In answering this question they acknowledge obligations to
the corporation itself, its shareholders, its employees, the consuming.
public, and the whole economy. Business leaders today are beginning
to think of themselves as stewards in whose hands rests the economic