and neglected. It is inherent in the intellectual climate in which leaders
and spokesmen of many of these countries find themselves. Our export
of growth doctrines has contributed. These typically assign the stellar
role to the formation of nonhuman capital, and take as an obvious
fact the superabundance of human resources. Steel mills are the real
symbol of industrialization. After all, the early industrialization of
England did not depend on investments in the labor force. New funds
and agencies are being authorized to transfer capital for physical goods
to these countries. The World Bank and our Export-Import Bank
have already had much experience. Then, too, measures have been
taken to pave the way for the investment of more private (nonhuman)
capital abroad. This one-sided effort is under way in spite of the fact
that the knowledge and skills required to take on and use efficiently
the superior techniques of production, the most valuable resource that
we could make available to them, is in very short supply in these
underdeveloped countries. Some growth of course can be had from the
increase in more conventional capital even though the labor that is
available is lacking both in skill and knowledge. But the rate of growth
will be seriously limited. It simply is not possible to have the fruits
of a modern agriculture and the abundance of modern industry without
making large investments in human beings.
Truly, the most distinctive feature of our economic system is the
growth in human capital. Without it there would be only hard, manual
work and poverty except for those who have income from property.
There is an early morning scene in Faulkner's Intruder in the Dust, of
a poor, solitary cultivator at work in a field. Let me paraphrase that line,
"The man without skills and knowledge leaning terrifically against.
nothing."


#### Split:
REFERENCES
1. G. S. BECKER, preliminary draft of study undertaken for Nat. Bur. Econ.
Research. New York 1960.
2.
"Underinvestment in College Education?," Proc., Am. Econ.
Rev., May 1960, 50, 346-54.
3. P. R. BRAHMANAND AND C. N. VAKIL, Planning for an Expanding Econ-
omy. Bombay 1956.
4. H. F. CLARK, “Potentialities of Educational Establishments Outside the
Conventional Structure of Higher Education," Financing Higher Educa-
tion, 1960-70, D. M. Keezer, ed. New York 1959.
5. SOLOMON FABRICANT, Basic Facts on Productivity Change, Nat. Bur.
Econ. Research, Occas. Paper 63. New York 1959. Table 5.
6. IRVING FISHER, The Nature of Capital and Income. New York 1906.
7. MILTON FRIEDMAN AND SIMON KUZNETS, Income from Independent Pro-
fessional Practice, Nat. Bur. Econ. Research. New York 1945.