the bright and educated have fallen for and preached it, in democratic
countries where the masses are well off beyond historical comparison!
And it has become the accepted political creed in the largest nations of
the Old World, who now threaten us so dangerously with "liberation"
in accord with its tenets. Is it human nature to be more dissatisfied the
better off one is? I shall not venture an answer to that one, either.
All I can do is to indicate the nature of the problem of free society,
as I see it, point out some false leads and some things that "have to
be,” “or else." I do not predict; it may be a case like Uncle Remus's
rabbit that was "bleeged to climb a tree," to get away from a dog. If
free society is to exist, the electorate must be informed, and must have
and use economic and political intelligence and, of course, possess the
moral qualities actually needful. On the intelligence factor I cannot
take time to say more. I hope I have said enough to show that the
problem is not of the kind so successfully attacked by natural science
and technology in the interest of control by man over the natural environment.
It must be "social" intelligence, of the general sort exemplified
in the discussion by a group of the problem of improving a game
-but with complications due to the vast scale of national and world
society and the complex of conflicting interests and ideals involved. For
help as to intelligence, we now instinctively turn to institutional education.
This can certainly impart information, up to varying individual
limits, and schools have also been successful enough in increasing
knowledge-some say too successful!-and the somewhat opposed
functions of transmission and revision might perhaps be better coordinated.
But does education make people intelligent? As to certain
"intellectual skills," no doubt it does, again up to varying limits. But
as to good sense, the "gumption” required to select and reject between
sound measures and crude economic nostrums, such as I mentioned
at the outset, the arbitrary interference with freedom of trade, fixing
prices by fiat, and preaching revolution, the evidence is not encouraging.
The "smart" and the educated seem to fall for these as readily as
the man-in-the-street. Indeed it often appears that the result of costly
training is to make people more ingenious in thinking up and defending
indefensible theories. The crackpots of all kinds and degrees are not
recruited from the dumbbell or ignoramus classes. Even outside the
"moral sciences," it is not these who spend their lives squaring the
circle and inventing perpetual-motion machines.

What schools can do on the side of moral qualities is another question.
But first let me say here what I have long believed, that the crucial
problem in our whole intellectual-spiritual life, our culture, is the relations
between the great values, perhaps especially truth and goodness.
or knowledge and virtue. I have time only for these and to note the