and Mill's forging of the general-equilibrium concept of demand and
supply schedules, even before the 1838 date of Cournot's definitive
partial-equilibrium formulation, is ignored by all but the true gourmets
of economic theory, who recognize it as an analytical contribution of
the first magnitude.
John Stuart Mill, son of a dogmatic father, was himself eclectic and
had an engaging ability to change his mind when new facts or arguments
became available or merely from rethinking old attitudes." It
is almost fatal to be flexible, eclectic, and prolific if you want your
name to go down in the history books: get known for one idea, however
farfetched it may be—such as that the rate of interest has to be
zero in the stationary state or that land is the source of all value-and
you are sure to get at least a paragraph in the history books for it.
Also, Mill had what Nietzsche once referred to as an offensively clear
style.
Yet so great was Mill as a thinker and reflector that he was able
to overcome these handicaps. His views on liberty will, even in the
post-Freud world, never go out of date and can perhaps be summarized
in the words of Mrs. Pat Campbell, Bernard Shaw's pen-mistress:
People should be allowed to do anything they like-provided only
they don't scare the horses in the street.
Mill is truly a transitional figure. Shaw shows this in one of his
wittiest plays, You Never Can Tell. A typical Shavian New Woman
returns from the West Indies after an absence of some 20 years to find
that all her revolutionary Millian notions have become old-hat, superseded
by new Fabian notions. The same conflict between the eighteenth
and twentieth century went on in Mill's own mind: it was fa-


#### Split:
7
' Sweden's Gustav Cassel, whom the public regarded as about the world's leading
economist in the 1920's and who might have become a truly outstanding scholar if his
temperament had been different, is shown by the following story to be a good opposite
to Mill. H. C. Sonne, the distinguished merchant banker and chairman of the National
Planning Association, has told how Cassel visited at Sonne's family home in Denmark in
the days around the First World War. A guest happened to mention that some scholar
had just made a fresh study of the relationship between the price level and gold supply
and had come up with conclusions strongly at variance with the famous Cassel thesis.
When asked what he intended to do about it, Cassel replied as follows. "I have a son-inlaw
whom I have put through Divinity School at some considerable expense. Now that
he has graduated and qualified for his diploma, he comes to me and says that he has lost
his faith and asks what to do. My advice to him was simple: 'Just carry on as if nothing
had happened'."
Relevant too is a conversation I had last month in London after I had given the Stamp
Memorial Lecture in the University of London for 1961. In that lecture I discussed,
among other things, some of the problems of economic forecasting and stressed the need
for scientific validation and the desirability of each forecaster's going back ruthlessly to
review ex post his ex ante predictions. "A great mistake," I was told by one of the best
forecasters in English academic life. "It is fatal ever to read what you have earlier
written. It breaks your nerve as a forecaster." His lips were smiling but his eyes looked
serious.