HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
19
difficult. Nature copies art. Monetary manipulations and tariff adjust-
ments reflect and intensify the significance of vernaculars, particularly
as effected by journalism and the radio and have their implications for
statistics. We are familiar with the efforts of Colin Clark to overcome
these difficulties but we can scarcely be unaware of the limitations of
his work. An obsession with statistics determined by national boundaries
increases the dangers of frictions of political entities.
The significance of statistics will vary with attitudes toward the state.
A census may be conducted for military purposes, and the scriptural
injunctions against enumeration are not without foundation; or for
purposes of more adequate distribution of tax and other burdens, in-
cluding railway rates. In the patriarchal traditions of Roman law the
state has been regarded as an instrument of oppression and the pro-
posals of Marx and Lenin assumed a withering of this concept of the
state and substitution of the worker for the bourgeoisie. The rapidity of
the spread of capitalism reflects the character of the state. In Sweden
and in Australia the industrial revolution was comparatively late with
the result that a soft capitalism was accompanied by nationalization, co-
operative movements and labour governments. In Russia the state as an
instrument of power was used conspicuously to overcome the difficulties
of the frontier, notably in building the trans-Siberian railway, and much
the same might be said of Canada in extending railways to the Pacific.
If we narrow our concern to countries in which common law plays
an important rôle we are by no means free of difficulties. The concept of
possession in common law and in German law essential to the expansion
of commerce and of economics in contrast with the concept of absolute
ownership in Roman law is by no means a guarantee of uniformity.
Bryce remarked that
The more any department of law lies within the domain of economic
interest, the more do the rules that belong to it tend to become the same
in all countries, for in the domain of economic interest Reason and Science
have full play. But the more the element of human emotion enters any
department of law, as for instance that which deals with the relations of
husband and wife, or of parent and child, or that which defines the free-
dom of the individual as against the State, the greater becomes the prob-
ability that existing divergences between the laws of different countries
may in that department continue, or even that new divergences may
appear.³
Sir Frederick Pollock has pointed to the bias of the common law toward
competition in that it must draw its resources from contentions between
competitors. The character and frequency of disputes are important
elements determining the profits of the legal profession. But Holmes
3 Bryce, Studies in History and Jurisprudence, Vol. I, p. 123.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
