our lucubrations must have some relation to the public interest if we
are to expect public support; but why they pay us for it anyway is
one of the deep economic mysteries, one might say another striking
example of popular economic irrationality. However, any politician
can always find an “economist” to endorse any position or policy he
sees fit to advocate, and perhaps this is the proper function of our
"science" in a democracy.

•

Let me say here that I feel like apologizing for the negativistic and
even complaining tone of my remarks so far-for there is no transgression
more unforgivable than refusing to be "optimistic," and
“constructive.” But I started out by mentioning the conflict of values
and especially that between truth and other values, and have said that
on this occasion I propose to give a considerable preference to truth
over other standards. It is an advantage of getting old, which I believe
even Cicero overlooked in his great apology for age. A certain independence
goes with getting to a point where one will hardly be hunting
a job or running for office or (probably) even courting the ladies. One
may then indulge in the luxury of a moderate amount of candor, even
of calling a spade a spade. And unpleasant truth-and truth is likely
to be unpleasant, or we should not place so much stress on optimismmay
be useful, up to a point. I would not carry it too far, but occasionally,
and in homeopathic doses, as it were. I am reminded of a
deep philosophical observation made by a high politico in a speech
some years ago, here in Chicago I believe, as reported by T. V. Smith:
"The time has come to take the bull by the tail and look the situation
square in the face." It has occurred to me that one of the interesting
"facts of life" is that the expression itself refers to things so ugly or
unpleasant that they are to be kept out of sight or explicit mention.
If time allowed, I should like to follow this out with some "research"
into the reasons why our professional stock in trade is referred to as
"the dismal science." At any rate, I do wish to stress the importance
of negative conclusions, particularly in relation to action, the advisability
of not doing things that will make matters worse, and the fact
that principles of economics do have in a high degree this unromantic
sort of value. And perhaps this applies to knowledge in general. A
humorist once popular in this country stated my favorite "principle"
in education: "It ain't ignorance that does the most damage, it's
knowin' so derned much that ain't so."

I also spoke earlier of philosophizing, or preaching, in contrast with
more objective discourse. A sermon should have a text; and I have
found a suitable one in the gospel according to "Saint" the Marquis de
Talleyrand-Périgord: The only good principle is to have no principles
(le seule bon principe est de n'en avoir aucun). Talleyrand, to be sure,