WITTE: ECONOMICS AND PUBLIC POLICY
3
is constituted of economists. Other economists are bureau chiefs and a
somewhat larger number have held such positions. There are also a
few members of the Association who hold elective or, more often,
responsible appointive positions in state and local governments. Thou-
sands of economists are civil service employees of the national, state,
and local governments. Relatively few of these, however, are in major
administrative positions and still fewer in decision-making spots. Most
economists in government service are engaged in research studies, pre-
paring reports and memoranda intended for the use of the decision-
makers or the information of the public. They see the light of day only
if superiors so decide and then usually with the authorship anonymous,
at least as to most of the contributors. Many economists engaged in
research work in the government are bitterly disappointed because they
do not see what influence their studies have in practical affairs. Their
research studies are valuable sources of information for academic
students, but how much they influence policy decisions is debatable and
doubtful. Beyond question, governmental research in economics and
other social science fields is worth more than it costs, but its influence
is seldom decisive.
Much lower in influence exerted, I believe, must be rated the pro-
nouncements some academic economists make from time to time on
issues of public policy. These often are lofty statements, as from Olym-
pus, addressed to what is assumed to be a waiting America anxious to hear
the words of economic wisdom on the practical issues of the day. Such pro-
nouncements may have some influence. Politicians and manipulators of
public opinion delight to cite as oracles known people who agree with
them. But how much the noncommitted public is influenced is doubtful.
As I see it, the influence of economists on public affairs is principally
that of scholars and teachers generally. This is the influence they exert
upon their students and listeners and those who read what they have
written. As John Maynard Keynes noted, the practical men of today
often repeat what some professor or scribbler long since dead put into
their heads.
This indirect influence obviously depends upon how well our students
and readers grasp what we teach and the readiness with which they
apply what they have learned to the practical public policy questions
of the day. It is on this score that I have the most serious doubts about
the contributions economists are making in the public policy field.
My reasons for doubts are that not much of what economists say and
write seems to "stick with” students and readers. A large percentage of
all college students today have some exposure to economics, particu-
larly in the introductory or principles course. Most students thus ex-
posed learn enough to pass this course. A smaller number, but still a
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:14:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
