tion with measurable quantities of things available at given prices.
Effort to get the maximum return in money for productive services
seems more realistic, but the view that production is purely in order
to have consumption, unaffected by interests of its own, is clearly
indefensible. Yet comparisons between uses of means are made and
apportionments effected; and the logical principles inherent in these
acts are useful for interpretation even if they do not accurately picture
the conscious motives. It suffices that men largely behave "as if" they
were trying to conform to the principles. These have great value in
the prediction of effects of changes, effects both on and through price
movements, changes that happen or are contrived. And the alternative,
which is statistics on a behavioristic basis, is subject to much the same
limitations, rooted in the vagueness and instability of motives. Cer-
tainly the main effort in statistical economics, the prediction of changes
in business conditions, has not produced results justifying much elation.
More detailed consideration would carry us into the question of the
possibilities and limitations of a natural or positive science of human
conduct. Many limitations are plain to see, and they are related to the
essential fact, which is that such a science is not what we need; indeed,
the idea is an absurdity. For, if even two people predict one another's
behavior and act on their predictions, both predictions will be falsified
and the activities of both parties misdirected. From the standpoint of
explanation alone, motives correspond to forces in mechanics. These
too are unobserved, metaphysical; we read them into the phenomena
for interpretation, because our minds work that way. Forces, however,
are known and measured only by their effects, hence always correspond
exactly with the latter. But we have other information about human
motives, and "know" indisputably that they do not correspond closely
with results, that the connection is affected in all degrees by error of
numerous kinds. Particularly, where motivation takes the form of
using means to achieve ends, either may be more or less "wrong," and
the two errors are only vaguely separable. In this field, knowledge
is so vague and evidence so conflicting that no one can tell with any
accuracy at all, even afterwards, to what degree any action is really
economic. Still further, we know that the goods and services produced,
traded, and consumed do not correspond to final or real wants. These
are largely not individual, as the theory requires, but inhere in social
relations, such as "keeping up with the Joneses," and "getting ahead
of the Joneses"; or, they are symbolic, even deliberately “set up,” as
in play, to make action interesting and yield the feeling of success or
victory thus reversing the means-end relation assumed in economics.
Or, the motive is no particular result but mere gratification of curiosity