Finally, monetary policy can contribute to offsetting major disturbances
in the economic system arising from other sources. If there is an
independent secular exhilaration-as the postwar expansion was described
by the proponents of secular stagnation-monetary policy can
in principle help to hold it in check by a slower rate of monetary
growth than would otherwise be desirable. If, as now, an explosive federal
budget threatens unprecedented deficits, monetary policy can hold
any inflationary dangers in check by a slower rate of monetary growth
than would otherwise be desirable. This will temporarily mean higher
interest rates than would otherwise prevail-to enable the government
to borrow the sums needed to finance the deficit—but by preventing the
speeding up of inflation, it may well mean both lower prices and lower
nominal interest rates for the long pull. If the end of a substantial war
offers the country an opportunity to shift resources from wartime to
peacetime production, monetary policy can ease the transition by a
higher rate of monetary growth than would otherwise be desirable--
though experience is not very encouraging that it can do so without
going too far.

I have put this point last, and stated it in qualified terms-as referring
to major disturbances-because I believe that the potentiality of
monetary policy in offsetting other forces making for instability is far
more limited than is commonly believed. We simply do not know
enough to be able to recognize minor disturbances when they occur or
to be able to predict either what their effects will be with any precision
or what monetary policy is required to offset their effects. We do not
know enough to be able to achieve stated objectives by delicate, or even
fairly coarse, changes in the mix of monetary and fiscal policy. In this
area particularly the best is likely to be the enemy of the good. Experience
suggests that the path of wisdom is to use monetary policy explicitly
to offset other disturbances only when they offer a "clear and present
danger."

III. How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted?

How should monetary policy be conducted to make the contribution
to our goals that it is capable of making? This is clearly not the occasion
for presenting a detailed "Program for Monetary Stability"-to
use the title of a book in which I tried to do so [3]. I shall restrict
myself here to two major requirements for monetary policy that follow
fairly directly from the preceding discussion.

The first requirement is that the monetary authority should guide itself
by magnitudes that it can control, not by ones that it cannot control.
If, as the authority has often done, it takes interest rates or the
current unemployment percentage as the immediate criterion of policy,