1955 when the data are available for these years, and otherwise the
census year 1950. Only part of the 1954 census data are now available.
Most of the data used in this analysis are published in annual reports
such as The Statistical Abstract of the U.S., 1955, Business Statistics,
1955, of the Department of Commerce, and The Farm Income Situa-
tion of the Agricultural Marketing Service of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. The 1955 data are mostly estimates based on the monthly
reports or releases of these agencies. The writer assumes responsibility
for these, but he has had much help in this and otherwise from
members of the staff of the Agricultural Marketing Service, particularly
its Division of Agricultural Economics and the Farm Finance Section
of the Agricultural Research Service. Also a choice has sometimes had
to be made as to which of two sources to use, such as between the Census
and U.S.D.A. series on farm labor force. The writer assumes full re-
sponsibility for this choice. Finally, no official data are available for
some of the series before 1929. The writer has extrapolated for these
years in a few cases.
Labor Force
I. Agriculture in the Nation's Economy
The magnitude and importance of agriculture in the nation's economy
can be measured in several ways, with wide differences in the results.
No one of these measures gives the whole picture. Table I assembles
the most authentic of the available data on labor force. Two series on
the farm labor force are given, the first, that of the Bureau of the
Census, which includes only those whose usual or chief activity is in
agriculture, and the second, that of the Department of Agriculture,
which counts all persons working on farms regardless of chief activity.
The simplest and most familiar of the measures of the relative mag-
nitude of agriculture is the percentage of the national civilian labor
force employed mainly in agriculture, which has fallen off a half since
1930 and two-fifths since 1940, but slightly less if part-time off-farm
workers are counted with farm labor force, since the number of these
is increasing relatively. The farm and nonfarm series in this table are
also not strictly comparable because of another reason, the agriculture
series does not include unemployed farm laborers. These averaged only
143,000 in 1954 and 173,000 in 1950. It will be noted that there has been
no decline in the farm labor force since 1953. In fact, it was higher last
fall than in any fall since 1950.
It will be noticed from Table I that the decline in the percentage
of the labor force employed mainly in agriculture has been 1.84 in the
five years since 1950, as against 5.25 in the war decade of the 1940's.
In the 1930's, it was only 3.76. This is the decade when several million