much more richly endowed with variables and functions for which
information could be obtained only at considerable effort and with results
that may or may not be worth the cost of the required research.
My charge that there is widespread confusion regarding the purposes
of the "theory of the firm" as used in traditional price theory refers
to this: The model of the firm in that theory is not, as so many
writers believe, designed to serve to explain and predict the behavior
of real firms; instead, it is designed to explain and predict changes in
observed prices (quoted, paid, received) as effects of particular
changes in conditions (wage rates, interest rates, import duties, excise
taxes, technology, etc.). In this causal connection the firm is only a
theoretical link, a mental construct helping to explain how one gets
from the cause to the effect. This is altogether different from explaining
the behavior of a firm. As the philosopher of science warns,
we ought not to confuse the explanans with the explanandum.
Misplaced Concreteness

To confuse the firm as a theoretical construct with the firm as an
empirical concept, that is, to confuse a heuristic fiction with a real organization
like General Motors or Atlantic & Pacific, is to commit the
"fallacy of misplaced concreteness." This fallacy consists in using theoretic
symbols as though they had a direct, observable, concrete meaning.


In some fields, investigators are protected from committing the fallacy,
at least with regard to some of their problems, by the fact that a
search for any empirical counterpart to the theoretical construct seems
hopeless. Thus, some physicists working on particle theory were able
* The same statement can be made about the household. The "household" in price theory




#### Split:

is not an object of study; it serves only as a theoretical link between changes in prices
and changes in labor services supplied and in consumer goods demanded. The hypothetica!
reactions of an imaginary decision-maker on the basis of assumed, internally consistent
preference functions serve as the simplest and heuristically satisfactory explanation of
empirical relationships between changes in prices and changes in quantities. In other words,
the household in price theory is not an object of study.
Behavioral studies of real households are something entirely different. A realistic, behavioral
theory of the household might conceivably distinguish the large, children-dominated
household from a simpler, father-dominated one. The decisions in the childrendominated
household, where mother frequently and father occasionally try to exercise
some influence, are probably not consistent, since different preference systems are made
explicit at various times, with varying decibels and gestures deployed to make them prevail
over the preferences of other members of the family.
One can imagine studies on the behavior of particular households selected at random or
in structured samples. If the researcher learns that a spoiled brat in a family wants to
eat nothing but beef and throws a tantrum every time his mother tries to feed him other
kinds of meat, a reduction in the price of chicken will probably not substantially increase
the consumption of chicken in this family. Thus, the weight of the child's taste in the
decision process of the family can explain a low elasticity of its demand for chicken. But
none of this has much bearing on general price theory.