The concept of workable competition is undoubtedly a highly signifi-
cant forward step in our understanding of the regulatory function; and
I hope and expect Clark will give us a further significant forward push
tomorrow afternoon. However, let us not forget that the conditions
needed to make a market "workably competitive" are quite special con-
ditions; also that there are serious difficulties in controlling these condi-
tions and in knowing when they are realized; further that there are
various markets to which they do not apply; and finally that these
conditions seem pertinent primarily to the price levels charged by the
firms in an industry, not to the price differentials between the different
specifications of a product or between different delivery points. We are
still a long way from having a realistic, generally applicable concept of
competition that can be depended on for a reasonably adequate per-
formance of the regulatory function.
Nonetheless there continue to be two main ways of viewing this
regulatory function, especially as it applies in the strictly private enter-
prise area, i.e., the area including all private, nonfinancial enterprises
except those classed as public utilities. It will be convenient to call
these two ways the institutional-supplements view and the perfect-
market view.
Anyone who delves into the history of our Association will be im-
pressed by the extent to which it was the institutional-supplements view
that provided the impetus to its establishment. The most active leaders
were young men in their thirties, like Adams, Ely, and J. B. Clark.
Fresh from their studies in Germany, these men believed various gov-
ernment actions were needed to supplement the working of competition
in the performance of the regulatory function. Let me cite the first sen-
tence of the statement of principles they wrote into the Association's
original constitution: "We regard the state as an agency whose posi-
tive assistance is one of the indispensable conditions of economic prog-
ress.
"10
The other view of the regulatory function of competition I call the
perfect-market view because it tends to regard the perfect-market model
as the norm which most markets should be made to approximate. On
this view if monopolies are effectively prevented or effectively broken
up, and if undue integration and unfair competitive practices are effec-
tively prohibited, the regulatory function of competition will be ade-
quately performed, so that, except for such efforts to maintain fair
10
' Report of the Organization of the American Economic Association, Publications of the
American Economic Association, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 35. Two of the older founders who had
expressed their convictions that the state should have a positive role in the economy were
the Association's first president, Francis A. Walker, and Andrew D. White. White was the
first president of Cornell University. Cornell has just celebrated the 125 anniversary of
his birth.