of "unrealistic assumptions" will not embroil me in another famous
and as yet unresolved controversy—namely, whether it is possible to
reach reasonable conclusions from absurd premises.) We have a still
higher stage of integration if all or the most important phases of
economic policy are coordinated, and positive steps are taken to
equalize commodity and factor prices.

I shall refrain from arbitrarily designating, as some have done, any
one stage as that of "true integration" and shall not go into the substantive
question whether the achievement of a lower stage of integration
by itself may have undesirable results which would involve probing
the mysterious depth of the theory of the “second best."
I. Waves of Integration

The recent movements toward integration are often regarded as
an entirely new development which has been envisioned and proposed
by many but has never before made headway on a significant scale.
I submit that this is true only in a formal and narrow sense.
Looking over the evolution of the world economy during the last
two hundred years or so, we can clearly discern three big waves of
integration—preceding and dwarfing the regional integration movements
of the last ten years. The secular trend toward integration and
growth of the world economy was interrupted by one period of sharp
decline and disintegration.

Let me first briefly identify these partly overlapping waves and
then discuss them in turn.

The first wave was the internal integration of the economies of the
nation states which we find today on the map of the world. The economy
of Great Britain was the first to be unified and integrated, the French
and American followed soon after. Later came other Continental European
and overseas countries.

The second wave overlapping or, if you prefer, superimposed upon
the first was the free trade movement that reached its high point at
the end of the 1870's. The movement towards freer trade was reversed
in 1878, but despite the fact that in most countries tariffs became
higher and higher, world trade continued to grow rapidly up to World
War I. For the underlying forces of rapid technological progress in
transport and mass production, as well as massive migration of labor
and capital toward the regions of "recent settlement” in the Western
Hemisphere, Oceania, and South Africa, still dominated over increasingly
protectionist commercial policies in many parts of the world. The
more drastic modern methods of trade restriction, quotas and exchange
control, had not yet made their appearance, and the movement toward
collectivism, interventionism, and national economic planning, which