still prefer a self-contained rural way of living. Their sons and daughters
will, in most cases, have already left for other parts.
The projections of a decline to 3.8 to 4.0 million farms in 1975 is
not to be taken to imply a further decline indefinitely from that date.
At some time not far off, possibly even a little before 1975, the rate of
decline in number of farms is likely to slacken and then level off; and
after that there may be a slow, small increase in number of farms. The
further growth of population and income is going to mean a growing
demand for products of the farm that will require more acres in cultivation
in addition to higher yields. This can all be provided for by
enlarging the area of existing farms. But some of it will take the form of
developing new units in tracts not now being farmed, or converting
grazing land to cropland in some tracts. The numbers of these may,
however, be offset and more by further enlargement of family farms in
present tracts. On balance, it would seem that a small increase in number
of farms may set in before the year 2000.

It should be obvious that nothing in the foregoing indicates a
disappearance of the family farm in the United States. What will
disappear in a large way eventually will be the less than family-size
farms. Part of this will come before 1975. There will still be left the
part-time and residential farms, perhaps as many as now, but they
will be of considerably different descriptions, and will generally support
levels of living that are pretty comparable with those of familysize
farms in the same areas, counting in their off-farm incomes. The
largest decline will be in the Class VI and V commercial farms. Those
left will be mostly older farmers content with or preferring a simple
rural life.

III. Welfare Aspects

We next need to consider what the foregoing means for the welfare
of the people of the nation as a whole and then of the agricultural
sector of it.

First of all is whether what was once a great agricultural nation
should be concerned over having agriculture presently engage only 6
per cent of its labor force, use only 12 per cent of its tangible assets
used in production, and turn out only 4 per cent of its gross national
product.

There are many, even a considerable fraction of those in the world
who consider themselves economists, who hold that there is something
special about agriculture that makes its prosperity and well-being
vital to the nation. One group of these are economists who hold more
or less to the belief that "depressions are farm led and farm fed,” or
at least that farm income and/or farm prices have a more potent effect