4
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
as a whole at its growing points. Under these conditions, Wicksteed's
conclusion held that the payment of the marginal products to each
unit of the respective factors of production exactly distributed the
product.
At this point, the theoretical discussion of marginal productivity
was largely allowed to lapse, except for the clarifications and refine-
ments which were introduced by our chairman, Professor Carver and
by F. M. Taylor.
Over the course of the decades which followed, two tendencies in
economic teaching became fairly evident. The first was a form of split
personality or scientific schizophrenia, which developed in our eco-
nomics departments. In the classes in economic theory, the principles
of pure marginal productivity were taught, uncontaminated by any
idea that there might be imperfect competition in either the product
or the factor markets, or that there might be unemployment for reasons
other than a wage rate in excess of social marginal productivity. This
group taught that labor received the amount which its last unit added
to the total product multiplied by the number of workers, while the
return to capital was similarly determined. Neither trade union nor
governmental action was needed to give to labor its own marginal
product under conditions of full employment. All that was required
was for the employers to bid competitively against each other for
labor and this condition was commonly assumed to exist. But if gov-
ernment and unions disturbed the system of laissez-faire by raising
wage rates above the social margin, this could only be effected by de-
creasing the numbers employed and hence creating unemployment.
In the classes which dealt with labor economics, however, a different
doctrine was taught. Here marginal productivity was muted and the
theory of the Webbs, as developed in Industrial Democracy, was
stressed. It was the pressure of the market competition for lower prices
which, weighing more heavily upon the successive levels of sellers be-
cause of their heavier overhead costs, tended to drive down wages and
to worsen working conditions. Unions and governmental legislation
operating through the imposition of common rules, could not only
protect the workers from this competition but could raise the general
standard of living.
It would be a fascinating task to analyze the differences between
these two sets of theories; one dealing primarily with real and the
other, with money wages; one assuming the relative absence and the
other, the presence of unemployment; one postulating free and per-
fect competition between employers and between workers; the other
absorbed by the power struggles of combinations of employers and
workers. But such is not our present task. It is enough to point out
