improving the taste and the quality of consumption of students throughout
the rest of their lives. If one were to allocate a substantial fraction
of the total costs of this education to consumption, say one-half, this
would, of course, double the observed rate of return to what would then
become the investment component in education that enhances the productivity
of man.
Fortunately, the problem of allocating the costs of education in the
labor force between consumption and investment does not arise to
plague us when we turn to the contribution that education makes to
earnings and to national income because a change in allocation only
alters the rate of return, not the total return. I noted at the outset that
the unexplained increases in U. S. national income have been especially
large in recent decades. On one set of assumptions, the unexplained part
amounts to nearly three-fifths of the total increase between 1929 and
1956. How much of this unexplained increase in income represents a
return to education in the labor force? A lower limit suggests that about
three-tenths of it, and an upper limit does not rule out that more than
one-half of it came from this source. 18 These estimates also imply that
between 36 and 70 per cent of the hitherto unexplained rise in the earnings
of labor is explained by returns to the additional education of
workers.
17
IV. A Concluding Note on Policy
One proceeds at his own peril in discussing social implications and
policy. The conventional hedge is to camouflage one's values and to
wear the mantle of academic innocence. Let me proceed unprotected!
1. Our tax laws everywhere discriminate against human capital. Although
the stock of such capital has become large and even though it is
obvious that human capital, like other forms of reproducible capital,
depreciates, becomes obsolete, and entails maintenance, our tax laws
are all but blind on these matters.
2. Human capital deteriorates when it is idle because unemployment
impairs the skills that workers have acquired. Losses in earnings can
be cushioned by appropriate payments but these do not keep idleness
from taking its toll from human capital.
17
3. There are many hindrances to the free choice of professions.
Real income doubled, rising from $150 to $302 billion in 1956 prices. Eighty-nine
billions of the increase in real income is taken to be unexplained, or about 59 per cent
of the total increase. The stock of education in the labor force rose by $355 billion of
which $69 billion is here allocated to the growth in the labor force to keep the per-worker
stock of education constant, and $286 billion represents the increase in the level of this
stock. See [19, Sec. 6] for an elaboration of the method and the relevant estimates.
18
In per cent, the lower estimate came out to 29 per cent and the upper estimate to 56
per cent.