simplifying processes of selection and emphasis to which economic theorizing
seems all too prone, to come forth with a system of universalized
“laws,” a system which is perhaps not implausible at its time of
origin, but which, as it becomes increasingly concerned about the consistency
of its internal logic, turns in upon itself, and grows more and
more remote from reality. This is precisely the sense in which Adam
Smith has come to be referred to as not a great economist, whereas
Ricardo was. And it was because Keynes presented a logical system,
based on a "law" which seemed not implausible in the conditions of
the 'thirties, that he was greeted as the founder of the "new" economics.
No one was better aware than Keynes of the need of qualifying
general principles to accord with the realities of particular situations.
His work, including also his earlier books, and particularly the Treatise
on Money, is full of passages in which he recognizes complicating circumstances
which do not fit his theories. In the General Theory,
one of the best examples is his passage on mathematical economics, in
which he recognizes how much farther formal logic (and the unrealities
inherent in it) can be carried in symbols than in words.5 Or, again,
his chapter on prices, in which he gives five excellent reasons why costs
and prices will rise, and inflation emerge, well before his full-employment
level of effective demand has been reached. No better analysis
could be desired as to why we experienced the inflationary conditions
of 1936-37 on a comparatively low level of employment; and nothing
further would be needed to explain the much more serious inflation of
the postwar period. But it was characteristic of Keynes-and this may
be inherent in the nature of economic theorizing—that after stating his
qualifications he always swept them aside as "not affecting the rigour"
of his conclusions. As he said of his qualifications about prices and
wages: "They have. . . a good deal of historical importance. But they
do not readily lend themselves to theoretical generalizations.” So,
like Ricardo in his particular context, he swept them from his mind,
and proceeded with his theory.
5
But we have been living in a period of very rapid change. Since the
Keynes, op. cit., pp. 297-98.


#### Split:
I have never been sure how much he really meant this passage (though surely he did
when he wrote it) and how much, perhaps unconsciously, he felt the need of taking the
curse off his own essentially similar kind of presentation. He, probably more than anyone
else, provided the impetus for the mathematical model-building which has become a
kind of economists' refuge since the General Theory appeared. As one of my younger
mathematical friends once said to me: "I don't know whether Keynes' system is right
or not, but it is a beautiful thing to play with."
It was, I think, in connection with this sort of interest and technique that the word
"elegance" came into economics.
"Ibid., p. 302.