specified wage rate, the kind of techniques to be employed, work sur-
roundings, and other details, so that they go far toward determining
the whole operating situation. It is the complaint of many employers
today that, under guise of wage rate bargaining, labor groups have
insinuated themselves into management in quite substantial, or quite
"improper," ways. Labor on its part would probably admit that by
collective bargaining it has sought to participate actively-it might
say more usefully-in the direction of business, in which it conceives.
itself to have a partnership interest.
The phrase "collective bargaining" has attained some vogue also
in connection with commodity prices, particularly in the agricultural
field. Collectively bargained prices are found rather generally in the
marketing of fluid milk and not infrequently in the selling of other
products, notably canning crops and sugar beets. It is strictly collective
or bilateral group bargaining when many dairymen act through a pro-
ducers' coöperative association to sell their product through a distribu-
tors' organization which covers all or most of the sellers of fluid milk in
a metropolitan area. The contract price which a growers' association.
negotiates with a single large sugar factory or cannery might seem to be
unilaterally collective if the processing corporation be regarded as an
individual buyer. But, in the last analysis, it constitutes group bargain-
ing between the body of individual farmers and the body of stock-
holders of the corporation, the actual bargaining being of necessity car-
ried on by the agents of both groups. Much the same can be said of
collective buying of fertilizer, gasoline and oil, and other farm supplies
by the larger consumer coöperatives such as the Grange League Federa-
tion Exchange. A great amount also of large-scale buying and selling
among manufacturers or between them and department stores, chains,
and mail order houses has many of the essential characteristics of col-
lective bargaining.
The real trouble in the transition from individual bargaining to the
group method of price making and business direction is that so-called
collective bargaining has been a child of violence and not a child of
love or even of scientific genetics. It is a matter of common knowledge
that the emergence of collective bargaining by both laborers and
farmers resulted from the growth in size and bargaining strength of
employing and purchasing units after the advent of the business corpo-
ration. But the attempt to redress the balance of bargaining strength,
once initiated, took on the familiar lines of the military race between
armor and armament; from armor that would stop any existing pro-
jectile to a projectile that would pierce any known armor; then still
better armor, followed by yet mightier guns, ad infinitum—unless
reason should intervene and institutions be devised to control the mad