ELLIS: THE ECONOMIC WAY OF THINKING
5
individual beings. Only to the degree that these costs and utilities to
individuals can express themselves in the market can economic analysis
exist. To the degree that political or ethical norms rule the market, to
the same degree does the possibility of applying economic criteria recede
or vanish.
II
I propose to test the validity of this proposition by reference to four
concepts of maximum or optimum solutions to be found in current
economics. To the economic way of thinking, “optimum” implies or
should imply the best application of limited resources to our less limited,
i.e., practically unlimited, wants. Of course this central problem takes
many aspects or dimensions; and consequently economic analysis is not
constrained to state just one optimum. The four concepts chosen for
purposes of the argument illlustrate different dimensions of the economic
problem; but they also illustrate the central theorem that where politics
and ethics come in by the window, economics goes out by the door.
Let us begin with one of the oldest-and currently one of the most
maligned of these optima, the so-called "doctrine of maximum satis-
faction." In non-technical language this principle states that, if left.
to their free choices, both consumers and producers will so allocate
expenditure that the return in any one line of outlay, either in direct
satisfaction from the good or in expected product, will not be less than
could be obtained from any other line of expenditure. Thus total satis-
faction is a maximum, being a maximum for each individual. All
economists state this principle with certain qualifications, and some
economists regard the qualifications to be so extensive as to leave
nothing of the original proposition. Those who would go so far would,
I believe, be forced to conclude also that the aggregate of individuals
accomplishes nothing in the effort toward a rational disposition of
their limited resources toward satisfying wants, i.e., we are unable to
economize, and economics is nothing.
But this is a vast overstatement. Monopoly qualifies the principle, or
more accurately limits its inclusiveness, for free choice is stipulated
within the principle itself and monopoly abridges free exchange. But
we are very far indeed from universal monopoly. Inequality of wealth
and income also qualifies the principle but in a much less extensive
fashion than commonly supposed. For to the degree that inequality
is functional, that is, to the degree to which it is necessary to pay one
man more than another to evoke his services, the national income or
aggregate of satisfactions to be divided out is increased over what it
would be with equal incomes. Unearned income from inherited wealth
or from illegal or sharp practices thus qualifies the maximizing of
product and satisfactions. Anyone may make his own guess as to how
