from being a major source of economic disturbance were a wholly
negative proposition, it would be none the less important for that. As it
happens, however, it is not a wholly negative proposition. The monetary
machine has gotten out of order even when there has been no central
authority with anything like the power now possessed by the Fed.
In the United States, the 1907 episode and earlier banking panics are
examples of how the monetary machine can get out of order largely on
its own. There is therefore a positive and important task for the monetary
authority to suggest improvements in the machine that will reduce
the chances that it will get out of order, and to use its own powers
so as to keep the machine in good working order.

A second thing monetary policy can do is provide a stable background
for the economy-keep the machine well oiled, to continue Mill's
analogy. Accomplishing the first task will contribute to this objective,
but there is more to it than that. Our economic system will work best
when producers and consumers, employers and employees, can proceed
with full confidence that the average level of prices will behave in a
known way in the future-preferably that it will be highly stable.
Under any conceivable institutional arrangements, and certainly under
those that now prevail in the United States, there is only a limited
amount of flexibility in prices and wages. We need to conserve this flexibility
to achieve changes in relative prices and wages that are required
to adjust to dynamic changes in tastes and technology. We should not
dissipate it simply to achieve changes in the absolute level of prices
that serve no economic function.

In an earlier era, the gold standard was relied on to provide confidence
in future monetary stability. In its heyday it served that function
reasonably well. It clearly no longer does, since there is scarce a country
in the world that is prepared to let the gold standard reign unchecked
and there are persuasive reasons why countries should not do
so. The monetary authority could operate as a surrogate for the gold
standard, if it pegged exchange rates and did so exclusively by altering
the quantity of money in response to balance of payment flows without
"sterilizing" surpluses or deficits and without resorting to open or concealed
exchange control or to changes in tariffs and quotas. But again,
though many central bankers talk this way, few are in fact willing to
follow this course and again there are persuasive reasons why they
should not do so. Such a policy would submit each country to the vagaries
not of an impersonal and automatic gold standard but of the policies
deliberate or accidental-of other monetary authorities.
In today's world, if monetary policy is to provide a stable background
for the economy it must do so by deliberately employing its
powers to that end. I shall come later to how it can do so.