24
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
mobility and for economic improvement, were far more limited than
in the more rapidly growing countries now in the developed category.
There was no hope, within the lifetime of a generation, of a significantly
perceptible rise in the level of real income, or even that the next genera-
tion might fare much better. It was this hope that served as an impor-
tant and realistic compensation for the wide inequality in income dis-
tribution that characterized the presently developed countries during
the earlier phases of their growth.
The third implication follows from the preceding two. It is quite
possible that income inequality has not narrowed in the underdeveloped
countries within recent decades. There is no empirical evidence to check
this conjectural implication, but it is suggested by the absence, in these
areas, of the dynamic forces associated with rapid growth that in the
developed countries checked the upward trend of the upper-income
shares that was due to the cumulative effect of continuous concentra-
tion of past savings; and it is also indicated by the failure of the politi-
cal and social systems of underdeveloped countries to initiate the govern-
mental or political practices that effectively bolster the weak positions
of the lower-income classes. Indeed, there is a possibility that inequality
in the secular income structure of underdeveloped countries may have
widened in recent decades-the only qualification being that where
there has been a recent shift from colonial to independent status, a
privileged, nonnative minority may have been eliminated. But the im-
plication, in terms of the income distribution among the native popula-
tion proper, still remains plausible.
The somber picture just presented may be an oversimplified one. But
I believe that it is sufficiently realistic to lend weight to the questions
it poses questions as to the bearing of the recent levels and trends in
income inequality, and the factors that determine them, upon the future
prospect of underdeveloped countries within the orbit of the free world.
The questions are difficult, but they must be faced unless we are
willing completely to disregard past experience or to extrapolate me-
chanically oversimplified impressions of past development. The first
question is: Is the pattern of the older developed countries likely to be
repeated in the sense that in the early phases of industrialization in the
underdeveloped countries income inequalities will tend to widen before
the leveling forces become strong enough first to stabilize and then re-
duce income inequalities? While the future cannot be an exact repetition
of the past, there are already certain elements in the present conditions
of underdeveloped societies, e.g., "swarming" of population due to sharp
cuts in death rates unaccompanied by declines in birth rates-that
threaten to widen inequality by depressing the relative position of lower-
income groups even further. Furthermore, if and when industrialization
