KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
13
sible if each used his own means in a self-sufficient economic life.
Everyone is free, as a Crusoe is free, and also enjoys the nearly bound-
less gain in the effectiveness of action possible through organization. In
fact, the individual's range of choice is extended in a new dimension
beyond that of Crusoe; he can produce anything he pleases, or make
any specific contribution to production, and independently consume
anything or any combination produced by anyone anywhere in the
economy. No other possible method of organization will afford this
two-fold freedom. And anyone is also free to stay out of the system
and live his own self-sufficient life, as far as he cares to stand the
loss in efficiency-which usually in fact would rapidly become too
great to be borne. And all are free to give and receive goods or counsel,
and to cooperate on any terms other than those set by the market which
they, the parties concerned, may agree in preferring on moral grounds
or for any reason. Distribution, what the individual (family unit) gets
out of it all, is also in principle the same as with a Crusoe; it is what
he produces. That is, what he the productive "capacity" he furnishes
-adds to total output, which is the only meaning the product of a unit
can have when production is a joint activity. In fact, the "imputation"
process under market-competition is valid in the sense in which any
single causes produce an effect where causes act jointly, as they always
do. It is the difference caused by the single contribution, as isolated by
the mathematical operation of partial differentiation. (Consumption
is usually treated, not very accurately, as unorganized.)
Stating all this at length makes me feel that I ought to apologize
to you, and to myself; for it is really at the level of truism and trivi-
ality. Of course there are "assumptions": that free association implies
mutual advantage and that freely chosen advantage to individuals is
"good," in contrast with obedience or ascetic self-denial or self-torture
(as men professed to believe even in Europe only a few centuries ago).
It is assumed that in general normal adults are rational enough to be
trusted to manage their own affairs, and decent enough to allow others
to do the same; but this means only in comparison with the dictates
of some human authority, political or ecclesiastical, chosen in what-
ever way, who might be in a position to order them around. The ethic
of liberal civilization holds (I repeat) both that men want to be free
and have a right to be, and they ought to be free, even if they them-
selves feel that their affairs might possibly be technically better man-
aged for them as slaves by some possible master. Of course even these
assumptions in an extreme version are made only for the purposes of
theory; everyone admits that in practice governments have to set some
limits to individual freedom and freedom of association and to perform
many functions on behalf of the community as a whole. If only eco-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:04:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
