takes work and money to find good credit risks which could use funds
and to find people who might be persuaded to buy particular types of
securities. Many men make their living by doing these things. How
dynamic the economy is able to become will depend partly upon how
good a job is done in adapting the machinery of the capital market to
new conditions.
ΧΙ
To a very substantial extent, of course, the opportunities for invest-
ment will be affected by the policies which the United States elects to
pursue toward the rest of the world after the war. If conditions are
reasonably stable, opportunities will exist for large international move-
ments of capital and for extensive investment on a broad scale. Indeed,
the potentialities of this are enormous. Here we see perhaps more
plainly than ever how dependent investment opportunity is upon policy,
for the problem of providing the basis for large international capital
movements which will greatly raise the standard of living of the entire
world is, in the main, a political one.
XII
One may infer from this survey that the outlook for employment
during the post-war generation is not necessarily dark. In fact, it may
turn out to be distinctly good, especially in the event, by no means
improbable, that the country is able to create favorable conditions for
large capital exports.27 But my purpose in this analysis has not been
to speculate about the future, because anything can happen. Rather
my purpose has been to focus your attention upon certain character-
istics of our economy. The conclusion to which I invite your attention
is that most of the variables which determine the amount of private
employment and the rate of expansion are influenced within wide range
by policies, public and private. This is true of the relation between costs
and prices; of the way in which cost curves shift in response to changes
in demand; of the quantity of resources, public and private, devoted
to technological discovery; of the disposition to venture, and the rela-
tive preference for various types of production plans; of the position
and income elasticity of the savings function. No fixed or inevitable
values may be assumed for these determinants of expansion. Hence
27
Should the defeat of Germany mean domination of Europe by Russia, the economic
future of the United States will be determined in great measure by Russian economic
and political policy. If American business men are sufficiently ingenious to develop a
large market here for Russian goods and if Russia does not revive her policy of world
revolution, the possibilities of a large and mutually advantageous exchange of goods
between Russia and the United States are bright. The pre-war experience of Germany,
the United Kingdom, and the United States indicates that trade need not be in the
main between industrial and agricultural countries.