Malthus's model stressed the services of land. This interpretation is
in keeping with K. F. Mather's account of the changes both in man's
demands upon his environment and in the nature of his resource limitations.
“A hundred years ago, nearly 80 per cent of all the things men
used were derived from the plant and animal kingdoms, with only about
20 per cent from the mineral kingdom. Today only about 30 per cent
of the things used in industrialized countries come from things that
grow; about 70 per cent have their sources in mines and quarries"
[25, pp. 55-56]. Some present-day economists, of course, take into account
all or nearly all services, the demand for which derives
significantly from demand for population. They view economic growth
as a process of accumulating capital in all its manifold forms [20, Ch.
14], and population growth as a process of transforming population,
physical environment, and capital of all sorts, as of given time periods,
into population of subsequent time periods. "Life," as A. N. Whitehead
[38, p. 160] observed, thus becomes "robbery," with human
societies living on other societies and (as A. J. Lotka noted), having
triumphed over their subhuman foes, finding themselves pressed by increasing
numbers to struggle with one another. Malthus may thus be
looked upon as an inspirer of post-Darwinian as well as of Darwinian
theories of struggle. Moreover, Malthus, in his rationalization of essential
agricultural self-sufficiency, a doctrine that later helped inspire
German agricultural protectionism, reveals himself a defender of bastions
of strength against both leveling forces and hordes. "When degree
is shak'd," he might have said with Shakespeare, “then enterprise
is sick."

Malthus's emphasis upon limitations to the augmentability of the
food supply was not reasserted again until the close of the century.
For, although natality did not begin generally to decline in Europe
until in or after the 1870's, and then not enough to affect the rate of
population growth significantly, per capita food consumption improved,
both because yield per acre had gradually increased and because
food, mainly cereal, was imported in large quantity from landrich
Eastern Europe and Europe Overseas as well as from some heavily
peopled parts of Asia [14] [8, 3rd ed., pp. 296-301]. Toward the
end of the nineteenth century, one and one-third centuries after England
began to import cereals on balance, Sir William Crookes (1832-
1919) warned that the question of the food supply "is of urgent
importance today, and it is a life and death question for generations to
come. . . . England and all civilized nations stand in deadly peril of not
having enough to eat." He pointed to the importance of wheat, the
lowness of yields, and the limited additional acreage suited to sowing
--conditions that would permit world population to overtake world
wheat supplies by 1931. Augmentation of yields and acreage prevented