important managerial objectives of a type that can be reduced to quantitative
analysis and to combine them in a single manageable “objective
function." This third approach merges marginalism with managerialism
in that it integrates money profits with other managerial goals
within one formula of "maximizing behavior."
The question is whether managerial marginalism is prescribed for
general application or only for so-called noncompetitive cases. Its most
prominent proponents prefer to use the old formula, based on profit
maximization, in situations where competition is effective and managerial
discretion therefore narrowly circumscribed. In the next sections
we shall discuss matters that at first blush may seem unrelated to this
issue but on reflection can shed indirect light on it.
The Analogy of the Theoretical Automobile Driver
One of the best remembered points in my exposition was the use of
an analogy designed to warn against mistaking theoretical variables
and their links for realistic descriptions of observable processes. This
was the analogy of the "theory of overtaking" automobiles on the highways
[21, pp. 534-35].
Analogies are often misleading, but in this particular case it served
its main purpose: to show that the theoretical variables need not be
estimated and the theoretical equations need not be solved through actual
calculation by the actors in the real world whose idealized types
are supposed to perform these difficult operations in the models constructed
for the explanation of recorded observations.2 The critics of
marginal analysis believed they had refuted it if they could show that
the exact numerical calculations of marginal magnitudes-cost, revenue,
productivity-were difficult or impossible to perform by real decision-
makers.
Yet, my analogy was only partially successful. An implication which
should have been obvious has been widely overlooked: that the type of
action assumed to be taken by the theoretical actor in the model under
specified conditions need not be expected and cannot be predicted actually
to be taken by any particular real actor. The empiricist's inclination
is to verify the theoretically deduced action by testing individual
behavior, although the theory serves only to explain and predict
effects of mass behavior.
We may illustrate this again by means of the same analogy, the theory
of overtaking. Assume a change of driving conditions occurs, say,
that the roads have become wet and slippery and fog has reduced visi-
*The theoretical automobile driver had to estimate, among other things, the speeds of


#### Split:
three vehicles and the distances between them, and to perform calculations involving potential
acceleration and a few other things, before he could decide to overtake the truck
ahead of him. An actual driver simply "sizes up" the situation and goes ahead.