distribution for the rural population is somewhat narrower than in
that for the urban population—even when based on annual income; and
this difference would probably be wider for distributions by secular
income levels. Operating with this simple model, what conclusions do
we reach? First, all other conditions being equal, the increasing weight
of urban population means an increasing share for the more unequal of
the two component distributions. Second, the relative difference in per
capita income between the rural and urban populations does not
necessarily drift downward in the process of economic growth: indeed,
there is some evidence to suggest that it is stable at best, and tends to
widen because per capita productivity in urban pursuits increases more
rapidly than in agriculture. If this is so, inequality in the total in-
come distribution should increase.
Two questions then arise: First, why does the share of the top-
income groups show no rise over time if the concentration of savings
has a cumulative effect? Second, why does income inequality decline
and particularly why does the share of the lower-income groups rise if
both the weight of the more unequal urban income distribution and the
relative difference between per capita urban and per capita rural in-
comes increase?
The first question has been discussed elsewhere, although the re-
sults are still preliminary hypotheses, and it would be impossible to
do more here than summarize them briefly.
Factors Counteracting the Concentration of Saving
One group of factors counteracting the cumulative effect of con-
other countries (see, e.g., a summary table of closely related measures of product and


#### Split:
workers engaged, for various divisions of the productive system, in Colin Clark, Conditions
of Economic Progress, 2nd ed. [London 1951], pp. 316-18). The same table suggests, for
the countries with sufficiently long records, a stable or increasing relative difference between
per-worker product in agriculture and per-worker product in other sectors of the economy.
* This is true of the U. S. distributions prior to the second world war (see sources cited
in footnote 1); in the years after the second world war the difference seems to have disap-
peared. It is true of the distributions for Prussia, cited by Prokopovich; and most conspicu-
ous for India today as shown in the rough distributions by M. Mukherjee and A. K. Ghosh
in "The Pattern of Income and Expenditures in the Indian Union: A Tentative Study,"
International Statistical Conferences, December 1951, Calcutta, India, Part III, pp. 49-68.
* Some elements of the discussion appeared in "Proportion of Capital Formation to Na-
tional Product," a paper submitted to the annual meeting of the American Economic Associ-
ation in 1951 and published in Am. Econ. Rev., Proceedings, May 1952, XLII, 507-26. A
more elaborate statement is presented in "International Differences in Capital Formation
and Financing” (particularly Appendix C, Levels and Trends in Income Shares of Upper
Income Groups), a paper submitted to a Conference on Capital Formation and Economic
Growth held in 1953 under the auspices of the Universities-National Bureau Committee
for Economic Research. It is now in press as part of the volume of proceedings of that
conference.