that it becomes impossible for the individual worker to understand
everything that is going on beyond his own small sector. It would
indeed be difficult to present in systematic form, as the Smiths, Mills,
and Marshalls have been able to do with more or less success,
comprehensive treatise that might display some measure of unity and
command all but universal approval. Thus, though the workers in
each sector are not at all displeased with how they are getting on
themselves, they are quite likely to disapprove of the manner in which
those in all the others go about their tasks, or even to deny that these
other tasks are worth bothering about at all. This is but natural. Many
types of mind are needed to build up the structure of human knowledge,
types which never quite understand one another. Science is
technique and the more it develops, the more completely does it pass
out of the range of comprehension not only of the public but, minus
his own chosen specialty, of the research worker himself. More or
less, this is so everywhere although greater uniformity of training
and greater discipline of endeavor may in physics reduce the tumult
to something like order. As everyone knows, however, there is with us
another source of confusion and another barrier to advance: most of
us, not content with their scientific task, yield to the call of public
duty and to their desire to serve their country and their age, and in
doing so bring into their work their individual schemes of values and
all their policies and politics-the whole of their moral personalities
up to their spiritual ambitions.
I am not going to reopen the old discussion on value judgments or
about the advocacy of group interests. On the contrary, it is essential
for my purpose to emphasize that in itself scientific performance does
not require us to divest ourselves of our value judgments or to renounce
the calling of an advocate of some particular interest. To
investigate facts or to develop tools for doing so is one thing; to
evaluate them from some moral or cultural standpoint is, in logic,
another thing, and the two need not conflict. Similarly, the advocate
of some interest may yet do honest analytic work, and the motive
of proving a point for the interest to which he owes allegiance does
not in itself prove anything for or against this analytic work: more
bluntly, advocacy does not imply lying. It spells indeed misconduct
to bend either facts or inferences from facts in order to make them
serve either an ideal or an interest. But such misconduct is not necessarily
inherent in a worker's arguing from "axiological premises" or
in advocacy per se.¹ Examples abound in which economists have estab-
* The above passage should be clear. But it may be as well to make its meaning more


#### Split:
explicit. The misconduct in question consists, as stated, in “bending facts or logic in
order to gain a point for either an ideal or an interest" irrespective of whether a writer