hungry college presidents backing the movement and corporate execu-
tives not only recognizing, in the language of the New York Times, that
"an increase in community-mindedness is a necessary consequence of
the enormous growth in the size and power of corporations" but also
identifying "the fate of the private liberal arts college with the fate of
the private enterprise system" [20, p. 12], corporate giving is destined
to grow both in size and in public favor.
Whither these institutional changes are leading us we do not know,
and about them most economists have been little concerned. Nor have
the other social scientists, who also have made peace with their environ-
ment, found them worthy of study. A noteworthy exception is Adolph
Berle, who in his brilliant analysis, The 20th Century Capitalist Revo-
lution [7], recognizes the modern corporation not merely as the agency
in whose power rests the economic welfare of America, but as a social
and political institution whose influence extends far beyond the market
it serves. In the current atmosphere of ideological warfare the great
corporation, Berle tells us, has undertaken, sometimes at the behest of
the federal government, sometimes voluntarily, the responsibility for
policing the nation's internal security system. Berle contends that in
acting as a policeman the corporation can and sometimes does violate
with impunity employees' constitutional rights by arbitrarily dismissing
workers whose loyalty has become suspect. He believes that not only
does the modern corporation have power over the lives of tens of thou-
sands of workers, but-having in mind the operations of a dozen large
oil companies both in international trade and in exploiting the oil re-
sources of underdeveloped countries—that it exercises a power in inter-
national affairs like that of a soverign state.
I believe that in the task of analyzing the significance of the modern
corporation to the American economy economists can play a larger role
than they have thus far played. Without adequately investigating the
causes of the merger movements that have restructured modern in-
dustry, they have assumed the inevitability of that structure. Because
modern technology decrees large production units, they have assumed,
without determining precisely the factors responsible for the growth of
particular corporations, that giant managerial units are necessary and
that their size is a reflection of their efficiency. Because corporations
have identified the impressive material progress of the last two decades
with the corporate system of control, some economists have assumed
that the large corporation is responsible for this progress. Because cor-
porations have spent millions for research in well-equipped laboratories
out of which have come remarkable industrial innovations, some econo-
mists have assumed that individual researchers can contribute little to
the advance of technology. These I believe are conclusions that have