leisure which in our kind of society should be the primary aims of
economic inquiry. But this book too turned out to be static economics,
with the difference-and this is what explains classical economics'
being a "special case"-that static equilibrium has now given way to
"comparative statics," and partial equilibrium analysis has now become
total equilibrium analysis. This latter, as it turned out, was what
Keynes meant by the quantity of resources employed, as distinct from
their distribution among uses and their relative rewards.
But surely the basic method is precisely on all fours with the classical
analysis. It is again a purely logical contrivance which proceeds
from certain assumed relationships to conclusions which inexorably
follow so long as the assumptions are maintained inviolate and "other
things" remain unchanged. In its essentials, the Keynesian system,
like almost any consistent theory, is simple. Several times in the course
of the book, Keynes sums it up very well in a few sentences. To my
mind, it is a recast version of the quantity theory of money, which he
seeks to "push back toward becoming a theory of output as a whole."
He does this by converting the quantity equation into an income equation
and applying concepts mainly derived from refinements on the
Marshallian k (demand for money), including as the really unique
feature of his theory, on which its whole validity depends, his "law"
of the propensity to consume. The core of the theory is his conclusion
that an advanced capitalistic society suffers from a combination of a
declining marginal propensity to consume and declining opportunities
for investment. This and other parts of the theory, such as the assumption
that costs and prices will remain constant or neutral as effective
demand rises to a full-employment level of income, represent the effect
on Keynes of the Great Depression of the 'thirties; and it is not
to be wondered at that his American disciples, in particular, elaborated
his theory (though I think without adding anything not already there)
into the stagnation thesis. Once again, as with Ricardo, we have the
"complex of suitabilities to the environment."
One interesting point in common, as between Keynes and Ricardo,
is their attitude toward "laws." Ricardo had rejected an inquiry into
the quantity of wealth because no "law" could be laid down. Keynes'
analysis of the level of employment turns primarily on his assumed
"law" of the propensity to consume. Herein lies a real dilemma for
economic theorizing. We are constantly searching for “laws” or “regularities”
or “normal” or “stable” relationships. Without them we are
reduced to what Bagehot called the "All Case" method of the German
historical school. But at the other extreme lies what he called the "One
Case" method of the British classical school. We are all too apt, seizing
upon the conditions of a particular period of time and applying the