a small fraction of the problem. The explanation of the slack is
really quite simple: It is the consequence, directly and indirectly via
somewhat tighter monetary and fiscal policies than otherwise would be
necessary, of the deficit in the balance of payments.13a
To put the matter in the simplest terms, suppose the deficit in the
balance of payments disappeared all by itself-as it well may through
continued inflation abroad-can anyone doubt that our economy would
expand substantially, partly from rising exports and import substitution,
partly in response to easier money and fiscal policies which then
would become possible?
It is really as simple as that although, looking at the size of the deficit
compared with GNP itself or with its annual increases, it may sound
astonishing that such a tiny tail should wag such a huge dog. But let
me get back to my main theme by brushing aside a mountain of real
and imaginary difficulties and controversies with the remark that it cannot
be beyond the wit of men—that is, us economists-to get this tiny
tail removed, with or without the surgery of a change in exchange rates,
and without in the process restricting trade in goods and services or reducing
growth itself below the otherwise attainable level.14
An indispensable condition for the rapid recovery and growth of the
industrial countries and the expansion of world trade was the removal
of the jungle of internal and external direct controls that had grown
up in many countries during the depression and the war. Price controls,
consumer rationing, allocation of raw materials, etc. were removed
quickly in some countries such as Germany and more gradually elsewhere.
By the middle 1950's the process was substantially finished almost
everywhere and the price mechanism had again taken the place
of the wartime system of direct controls. The liberation of the economies
of the industrial countries in Europe and elsewhere from the
shackles of direct control released great energies which led to the spectacular
rise in output and consumer satisfaction. I add "consumer's
satisfaction" because improvements in quality of products and a great


#### Split:
18a William McC. Martin, Jr., Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, has acknowledged the role of the balance of payments. "I am convinced that our
failure to solve the problem [of the balance of payments] up to now has not only been
damaging to our international relations but has also impeded the achievement of even high
levels of output and resource utilization" (statement before the House Committee on
Banking and Currency, July 22, 1963, Fed. Reserve Bull., Aug. 1963, p. 1062).
Since the slack is small, it cannot be far off the mark to say that the external deficit has
been the major cause of the slowdown.
"I do not wish to say, of course, that in the absence of a balance-of-payments deficit
there will never again be a recession or a period of slack. For example, if at a higher level
of employment wage-push became stronger and prices started to creep up again, the monetary
and financial brakes would sooner or later be applied as they were in the late 1950's
with the same general result. But demand inflation, wage-push, Phillips curves, income
policy, and all that are not the subject of this talk.