erally their role in the period of growing state control over economic
life. The traditional and inevitable economic functions of the state
such as taxation and the control of the monetary system are not considered
in the following remarks. These functions pose no question of
the desirability of state action and very different questions of the economist'
s role in policy. On the basis of a highly incomplete canvass of
the literature, I propose three generalizations.

First, there was a large and growing range of policy issues which
economists essentially ignored. If we examine the English legislation
governing shop closing hours, or pure food and drug inspection, or municipal
utilities, or railway and truck and ocean transportation, or the
legal status of labor unions, or a host of other questions, we shall find
that as a rule economists did not write on the issue, or appear before
the Royal Commissions, or otherwise participate in the policy formulation.
Before 1914 the detachment from contemporary policy was Olympian,
thereafter it was mortal but awesome. American economists, perhaps
reflecting their Germanic training, were more interested in policy,
so one can cite examples like John R. Commons on regulation of public
utilities and on workmen's compensation laws, J. B. Clark and a host of
others on the trust problem, and so on. Even here, however, many important
economic policies were (and are still) ignored, among them
pure food laws, wage legislation, fair employment practices acts, the
zoning of land uses, and controls over the capital markets.
Second, even when economists took an active and direct interest in
a policy issue, they did not make systematic empirical studies to establish
the extent and nature of a problem or the probable efficiency of
alternative methods of solving the problem.

It is difficult to support allegations about the absence of a given type
of scientific work; often the allegation illuminates only the reading
habits of its author. I am reasonably confident, however, that the following
subjects were not investigated with even modest thoroughness:
(1) the effects of regulation on the level and structure of prices or rates
of public utilities; (2) the extent to which safety in production processes
and purity in products are achieved by a competitive market and
by a regulatory body; (3) the cost to the community of preventing
failures of financial institutions by the route of suppressing competition
compared with the costs by the route of insurance; (4) the effects
of price support systems for distressed industries upon the distribution
of income, as compared with alternative policies; and (5) the effects
of policies designed to preserve competition. This list is short, but I
submit that the examples are important enough to give credence to my
generalization on the paucity of systematic empirical work on the techniques
of economic policy. From 1776 to 1964 the chief instrument