view the standing of my profession in the world, or that of my special
branch of it, dealing with principles or "theory" in the profession as a
whole, I get no more comfort from what I see. So, I have proposed for
the address which custom demands on this occasion, a bit of general
stock-taking. Such an endeavor is itself reasonably in accord with
custom, if somewhat strange for a “learned society," and I hope it is
a custom not dishonored in the observance. Custom also allows the
speaker, perhaps especially one of the age of this incumbent, to take
a somewhat personal or reminiscent tone, and to verge toward the
character of a sermon rather than that of science or scholarship.
My embarrassment, not only at standing before this audience, but
in all teaching and writing about economic principles, is not new, as
its source is not. I have been increasingly moved to wonder whether
my job is a job or a racket, whether economists, and particularly eco-
nomic theorists, may not be in the position that Cicero, citing Cato,
ascribed to the augurs of Rome-that they should cover their faces
or burst into laughter when they met on the street. Thus, for reasons
which I hope to develop, briefly, my interest has of late tended to shift
from the problems of economic theory, or what seem to be its proper
concerns, to the question of why people so generally, and the learned
élite in particular, as they express themselves in various ways, choose
nonsense instead of sense and shake the dust from their feet at us.
And also, why the theorist is so commonly “in the dog-house" among
economists, as classified by academic faculty lists and books and ar-
ticles in learned journals carrying the word "economic" in their titles.
And I also note that the period of my career as an economist has
been marked by a series of “movements" -I will not say fads-in
economic writing and teaching, consisting largely of attacks on tradi-
tional views of the nature and function of economics, in which the
term "orthodoxy" commonly appears as a "cuss-word," an epithet of
reproach. The critics, aggressors, have more or less explicitly advocated
the abolition of an economics of economic principles and its replace-
ment by almost anything or everything else, other principles if they
can be found psychological, historical, statistical, political, or ethical,
or no principles at all but factual description of some sector of social-
human phenomena called “economic” for reasons not clear to me. I
cannot comment in detail on these fashions in thinking. The latest
"new economics" and in my opinion rather the worst, for fallacious
doctrine and pernicious consequences, is that launched by the late
John Maynard (Lord) Keynes, who for a decade succeeded in carrying
economic thinking well back to the dark age, but of late this wave of
the future has happily been passing.
This same period of history has also seen a growing disregard for