provide necessary assurance that all relevant private rights and
interests will be accorded due consideration in the fashioning of
determinations deemed to further the public good. The validity of these
administrative determinations, finally, is subject to review by the courts.
While judicial review generally confines itself to mere questions of
power, and does not seek to substitute the judgment of the courts for
that of the regulatory bodies, it provides effective safeguards against
unconstitutional assertions of power, both in the governing legislative
policies and in the resulting administrative orders, against exercise of
administrative authority not supported by valid interpretation of the
pertinent statutory enactments, and against abuse of administrative
discretion effected through any failure to adhere to due process, broadly
conceived, as evolved in the established traditions of the law. The
regulatory agencies are thus kept within the bounds of legitimate
authority deliberately vested in them. Arbitrary power and arbitrary
action are both alien to the prevailing peacetime system of administrative
regulation.
Under such a system, however, it is a matter of crucial importance
that the independence of the regulatory agencies be meticulously
maintained. Only in this way can the characteristic advantages of the
administrative method be realized. It is especially necessary that these
tribunals be not dominated by political pressures. Political influences
have their proper place in the development of guiding policies through
legislative action; but in the execution of these policies as established
by law, the responsible administrative bodies must be free to reach
determinations based entirely upon their own informed judgment. Such
freedom from external influence or control is as essential in this sphere
as in case of the determinations of the courts. It conditions the attainment
of just results in particular proceedings and the preservation of
needed confidence in the regulatory process as a whole. The established
setup is in point of fact one of independent commissions; and when
political interference makes itself felt, as it does in a variety of ways
from time to time, it at least tends to evoke adverse popular reactions,
because of manifest departure from the generally accepted norm of
administrative independence. The plausible proposals that are put forward
recurrently for the absorption of the regulatory agencies by the
regular departments of government constitute a much more serious
threat. It would be difficult, in such a setup, to divorce specific
administrative determinations, no less than general matters of guiding
policy, from the political objectives of the party in power; and in these
circumstances the orderly safeguards against arbitrary or capricious
action which have been laboriously developed over the years would
tend, as a practical matter, to be seriously impaired. A like danger