HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
13
I never knew a person who cared more deeply for excellence than
Harold Innis. I never knew a person who had a more catholic sense
of what excellence consists of than Harold Innis. He understood, as
few did, the difficulty and majesty of the task in the social sciences.
To him, excellence started within the individual, with what he brought
of himself to the task and with what he demanded of himself. Men who
dipped from shallow pools or fetid pools had no standing with him. Only
the best in quality of mind, in range of outlook, in diligence at getting at
all the facts, and in integrity of scholarly spirit, was good enough for
him.
One of the privileges of being an officer of The Rockefeller Founda-
tion is that such men as Innis so generously share their scholarship,
their wisdom, their insight, and their integrity with us. Such counsel
saves a foundation from the many mistakes that might arise from
policies determined entirely from within.
From here on I will speak to you in the words of Innis himself
taken from letters written by him to Foundation officers between 1940
and 1952. These words will, I think, remind us that Harold Innis was
not merely a great social scientist; he was a humanist as well.
The cultivated mind has been forfeited to the demand for superficiality;
as a result, attempts to secure a proper perspective on life have been
almost completely unsuccessful.
There is no appreciation whatever of the philosophical problems of state-
craft in a democratic society, simply an assumption that science can tell
statesmen how to push people around without its being known that they
are being pushed around.
Your grant to economic history was a bold, imaginative stroke designed
to check the obsession with the immediate which has become the most
serious menace of social science and especially of economics. The struggle
for a concern with time is a struggle against tremendous odds. In the
general strategy, devices must be worked out which will enable scholars
to concentrate on work involving a substantial part of their lives.
As I indicated in conversation, I would hope that determined efforts could
be made to prevent a further widening of the gap between the humanities
and the social sciences and to bring them closer together. Failure to realize
the significance of this problem implies sterility in both the humanities
and the social sciences. One would hope that great efforts can be made to
bring about a happier relation.
Since seeing you, I have spent two or three days with university presidents
at Hamilton-Canadian Universities Congress. Seriously, your plan of
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
