of laissez faire. Labor unions and farm organizations had been
unhappy long before the New Deal at what they considered the imbalance
between their own economic power and that of industrial and
financial corporations. By the time the bottom of the depression had
been reached, labor unions and farm organizations had become determined
to correct this economic imbalance of power by the use of political
power.

Through the Agricultural Adjustment Act, the Wagner Act and other
associated legislation of the New Deal, the powers of government were
used to effectuate the purposes of these organizations. This meant
direct intervention by government in the pricing and production processes
of agriculture. It meant the strengthening of the bargaining
powers of labor unions by law and the frequent intervention by government
on the side of labor unions in industrial disputes. Whether any
previously existing imbalance of power was not more than corrected
remains a matter of controversy.

The New Deal and the Fair Deal not only threw the power of the
state on the side of labor and farm organizations in a bargaining sense.
Beyond this, the government came to assume the responsibility whenever
necessary, for the maintenance, through governmental spending and
lending, deficit financing and the redistribution of income through taxation,
of a volume of purchasing power sufficiently large to underwrite
the higher wage rates and farm prices. In this way the policy of throwing
the powers of government on the side of particular economic groups
was married to the Keynesian monetary and credit policy.2 The potentially
inflationary bias in the economy inherent in the implementation
of this policy is obvious.

I have had to leave out for lack of time the development of the "welfare
capitalism” point of view among industrialists on the one hand
and the passage of social security legislation on the other, although
both of these have substantially reduced the rigors of our economic
system and might well be included in the list of substantial modifications
of the economic system. Even more fundamental has been the
generally rcognized development of a managerial class whose interest
in the corporation and whose point of view is not exclusively that of
profit maximization for the stockholders. To the extent that this is true,
a substantial modification of the capitalistic system is reflected, since
of course in the traditional model the public interest is served through
the effort at profit maximization.





#### Split:

* Keynes would no doubt in principle have opposed the marriage. Equilibrium at less than
full employment he did not consider to depend upon sticky prices although it did depend
upon sticky money wages. Further, Keynes believed that appropriate monetary, credit and
fiscal policies would obviate the necessity for governmental control of prices and production.