spirit of some labor and agricultural leaders, we ought to remember
that Rome was not built in a day, and that faith may be justified by
patience. If I am optimistic about the potential ability of private enterprise
to abolish poverty in America, to maintain full employment, and
to maintain the full and continuous market for consumption goods,
without which economic stability is impossible, my optimism is distinctly
conditional. Business must be willing to give up some of its
freedom to obtain the essential economic coördination which mere
freedom itself can never secure. It must realize that with full and
continuous market, aggregate profits will be satisfactory even with
very low profit margins and low marginal productivity of capital. It
must give up its cartels and its restriction of output. In a word, it must
cast its bread upon the waters, in the faith that the prosperity of a
hundred million consumers means the prosperity of industry.
There is much to be said, after all, for the ivory tower. You can see
farther and more clearly from it than you can from the ground. It is
probable there are other-it is barely possible there are better-qualifications
for the policy-maker than having had at some time to meet a
payroll. Small men will always sneer at the "theorist." It is the readiest
way to conceal ignorance. But every policy is based on theory of some
sort; and every theory back of social policy will be found in the final
analysis to be based on a scale of values, some sort of ethics, whether
democratic or otherwise.

This is why I think we need more depth and breadth in the education
of prospective economists and political scientists. I do not think that
we can assume that all the men and women who go through the informational
and analytical courses of our graduate and professional
schools come out with an understanding either of the broad foundations
of democratic ethics, or of the elementary meaning of economy, looked
at from the over-all social point of view. A multitude of technical
tasks require the services of a host of technically trained experts. We
have answered this demand, but we have not sufficiently emphasized
the solid liberal education necessary to anything more. We tend to
leave broad questions of policy to others, or to the unanalyzed prejudices
of our own subconscious social philosophy, which we have not
had the time, or the courage, to take out and examine. Economists, and
political scientists, have not demanded enough of themselves.
The difference between the statesman and the politician is that the
politician is mainly concerned with the compromises, log-rolling, and
organization necessary to getting immediate jobs done, while the statesman
looks broadly to the future. Politicians are as necessary to democratic
government as experts are to technology and industry. But they
are not sufficient to our needs. As Madam Chiang Kai-shek reminded