alienation; it is also inimical to individual-political and consumer sovereignty.
Mathematically, the larger the city, the smaller is the relative
size of the resolute minority that could rule it [28]. Politically and
psychologically, the larger the city, the weaker tends to be the belief of
the voter that he can do anything to influence the ruling camarilla and
improve his community. Finally, as political power is channeled into
the hands of city-ruling minorities, the taxing power of the central
government tends to be placed increasingly at the disposal of these minorities
and perhaps in keeping with what one may call the Augustus
Caesar principle of public finance. (You will recall Seutonius's account.
Caesar once considered discontinuing the practice of distributing
free grain, but he decided against it even though it was injuring
Italian agriculture. "I did not carry out my purpose," he said, because
I felt "sure that the practice would one day be renewed by someone
ambitious of popular favor.")
While notable contributions have been made to the economic analysis
of fertility [3, 12], the explanation of its short-run behavior has
not yet been made as economic as possible, nor have the actual and the
potential feedback connections of household with economy been adequately
identified and explored. If one allows for random variables and
treats certain fertility-affecting elements (religious and other values,
rural-urban and educational differences) as short-run constants, one
should be able to explain changes in gross reproduction in terms of
changes in price structure and opportunity costs and of movements
along curves of demand for children and of shifts of both these curves
and curves representing costs of children. For a change in fertility
reflects the response, usually lagged, of actual and potential households
to changes in (a) the prices and character of alternatives to children,
and (b) the benefits anticipated to be derivable from children and/or
changes in the input costs of children, together with additions (subtractions)
in costs associated with changes in family economic status.
It must be assumed, of course, that fertility is easily controlled. This
assumption is quite tenable in advanced countries, now that earlier
contraceptive methods, including the unreliable "safe-period"-in
Spain children who owe their existence to failure of this method are
eponymously described as Oginitos after the method's discoverer (New
Leader, Sept. 13, 1965, p. 7)-have been supplemented by contraceptive
pills and cheap, effective intrauterine devices. It is essential
also that the analyst view the child as the partial analogue of both a
consumer's and a producer's durable good. Then the analytical as well
as the empirical problem becomes one of isolating the determinants
that affect the demand for, and the supply of, children at household
levels, and thus give rise, along with household interdependence, to aggregate
demand and supply functions.