We can hope that with the slogan of "Trade Not Aid" we may be
passing out of this sort of world. I doubt that this transition will happen
soon enough or be thorough-going enough to destroy the usefulness of
our effort at this sort of analysis.
III
After looking at this complex problem from so many diverse angles,
my own conclusion is that our economy has indeed undergone sub-
stantial organizational and functional changes. The development of an
economic theory adequate for an understanding of this current mixed
type of economy presents us with serious problems requiring the full
concentration of our energies.
Assuredly it does not follow that competition has disappeared. It is
perfectly clear that competition, if we stretch the term enough, covers
almost completely some aspects of our economy and affects in some
degree every part of it. If, however, we use the term capitalism to des-
ignate the kind of economic systm which characterized the United
States in the past we would at least need to use some qualifying adjec-
tive or adjectives to designate the current economic system in which the
role of competition has altered. But to find the right adjectives, to say
just when the change occurred, to draw the line between past and
present is extraordinarily difficult.
In part, this difficulty of establishing the chronology of change is due
to the natural tendency to define a competitive laissez-faire economy
in terms of abstract and ideal models. Frank Knight, and many others,
have pointed out-although not in this phraseology-that in a very
real sense "Competition is not what it used to be and never was." J. M.
Clark has stressed, for example, the illogicalness of supposing that the
actual institutional pricing system for manufactured goods ever was
at any time like the pricing of staple agricultural products from which
the competitive pricing model was so largely derived. It has been re-
peatedly remarked in this connection that "administered prices," for
example, are not a recent phenomenon.
Yet even after the difficulties of establishing chronology are conceded,
it seems to me that we can say that by the beginning of World War I our
economy had become sufficiently characterized by concentration in
industry, imperfect competition, oligopoly, administered industrial
prices, price leadership and other departures from or modifications of
the rule of the free, fully competitive market for us to consider the
change fundamental.
By the beginning of World War II there had taken place another
fundamental change involving a substantial departure from the princi-