the impression from autobiographies of such contemporaries as
J. J. Thomson, the discoverer of the electron and Nobel Prize winner,
that they had no great opinion of the economics being offered at that
time in Cambridge.
...
IV. We Happy Few
If then Marshall and neoclassical writers have had influence upon
the affairs of men, and I think they have had pronounced influence,
we must regard these influencings as being indirect rather than direct.
For a long time John Maynard Keynes was known for one famous
quotation, the casual remark: "In the long run we are all dead.” Now
that Keynes himself is dead, he is best known for a different quotation:
the ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they
are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly
understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who
believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences,
are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority,
who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic
scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power of vested interests
is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment
of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a certain interval; for in
the field of economic and political philosophy there are not many who
are influenced by new theories after they are twenty-five or thirty years
of age, so that the ideas which civil servants and politicians and even
agitators apply to current events are not likely to be the newest. But,
soon or late, it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for
good or evil.
This is fine writing. And no doubt it is flattering to our egos. But
is it really true? Keynes did not specify what academic scribblers he
had in mind, and I am not sure how easy it would have been for him
to do so. (Thus, when we see a politician favoring protective tariffs
or a balanced budget, do we have to look for any profound analysis
from some earlier thinker or can we not simply reflect that most
people generate such notions almost unthinkingly? Yet, even if that
is so, what are we to conclude in the case where we observe a politician
favoring free trade or deficit-financing? The issue is certainly not a
simple one.)
The leaders of this world may seem to be led around through the
nose by their economist advisers. But who is pulling and who is pushing?
And note this: he who picks his doctor from an array of competing
doctors is in a real sense his own doctor. The Prince often
gets to hear what he wants to hear.
Where does that leave us then as economists? It leaves us where