welfare of society. The late chairman of the Johns-Manville Corpora-
tion put it this way:
In the evolution of a complex industrial society the social responsibility of
management has broadened correspondingly. Management no longer repre-
sents, as it once did, merely the single interest of ownership; increasingly
it functions on the basis of a trusteeship which endeavors to maintain,
between four basic interlocking groups, a proper balance of equity. Today
the executive head of every business is accountable not only to his share-
holders, but to the members of his working organization, to his customers,
and to the public [9, p. 49].
Fortune, the magazine of big business, tells us that "one of the
most obvious yet least recognized facts of our time is that the large
corporation is becoming one of free society's major instruments of
economic justice" [10, p. 98]. On the question of the corporation's
social responsibility, Frank W. Pierce, a director of what Fortune
regards as America's model corporation, the Standard Oil Company
(New Jersey), states that "it is becoming clear that in our modern
society top management has the opportunity-in fact, I should say
the duty to act as a balance wheel in relation to three groups of
interests—the interests of owners, of employees, and of the public,
all of whom have a stake in the output of industry” [9, p. 51, n. 8].*
Not only does the modern corporation recognize its obligation to the
public, but it conceives that obligation broadly. It has for some time
been a self-appointed guardian of private enterprise and has engaged
in an educational campaign to create public opinion about itself and
the traditional American way of life with which it identifies itself.
In doing so it has assumed that it can sell private enterprise to the
American public just as it sells soap, cosmetics, electrical appliances,
or automobiles. Corporate leaders talking to each other have said,
"We have a continuous selling job to do," involving the merchandising
of "certain simple facts." They believe that to get the best results they
should follow, as they have put it, a "down-to-earth simple approach"
in which they "take people by their mental hands” [9, p. 56] and lead
them to the altar of free enterprise where they may find renewed faith
in it. In this educational and spiritual campaign they are utilizing the
usual media of mass communication-the radio, television, and the
press through which they try to shape attitudes, curb or create
6
* This point of view represents a significant contrast with Adam Smith's and suggests
how far current thinking on economic matters has been affected by institutional arrange-
ments. Smith said, "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the
baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address
ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our
own necessities but of their advantages. Nobody but a beggar chuses to depend chiefly
upon the benevolence of his fellow-citizens" [26, p. 14].