so essential to overcoming mineral and agricultural shortages, are
generally least abundant where needs are greatest. Should income grow
as expected in the underdeveloped world, natural-resource shortages
will be intensified, probably in greater measure than technical capacity
to countervail them. Similarly, diets reportedly are quantitatively and/
or qualitatively most deficient in Asia, Africa, and parts of Latin
America-in areas commonly short of skill and capital, even when not
also of land. There one finds not even a basis for the inverted Malthusianism
of Western optimists which equates solution of the population
problem with a full stomach. One also finds neglected two incomedepressing
effects of population growth: (a) absorption of nonagricultural
land which might better have supplied man with amenities; (b)
steady diminution of the amount available per capita of suitably situated
space and goods and services formerly free.
Neglected above all is man's conversion of such “parameters of
state" as atmosphere, topography, and climate into variables with the
result that conditions of life and interspecies equilibrium-never very
stable are changing. Lotka anticipated this possibility in his remarkable
Elements of Physical Biology (1925). Malthus had treated physical
environment as a constant even though man had for many centuries
been modifying this environment [35]. But then Malthus lived
before the goat had been replaced by bulldozer, dragline, and nuclear
explosives, and man had become the most destructive of biotypes.
After all, even the physicist, R. A. Millikan, could write as late as
1928: "The energy available. . . through the disintegration of radioactive,
or any other, atoms may perhaps be sufficient to keep the corner
peanut and popcorn man going, on a few street corners in our larger
towns," but no more (Science, Sept. 28, 1928, p. 284). Today, man is
confronted not only by denudation and erosion of soil as well as possible
mineral shortages but also by the threat that accumulating filth
will convert his promised great society into a merely gray society. Witness
here in America endless dumping of trash (four pounds per person
per day), lead contamination in excess of that experienced in ancient
Rome, and water and air pollution soon destined to cost above $7
billion yearly. Merely cleaning up the nation's polluted waters could
cost over $50 billion. Indeed, some hold, J. K. Galbraith had better labeled
ours an effluent society than an affluent one, perhaps so effluent
that many of its members have lost their sensitivity to effluvia. Possibly
more threatening still are the changes man is producing "in the
geochemical cycles of the elements," thereby "disturbing their natural
balance in the uppermost geospheres." Thus since 1900 the carbon
dioxide content of the air has risen about 10 per cent and is still rising
[30, pp. 365-66, 546-47]. In short, multiplying man, forced by population