interest rates down. How will it try to do so? By buying securities.
This raises their prices and lowers their yields. In the process, it also
increases the quantity of reserves available to banks, hence the amount
of bank credit, and, ultimately the total quantity of money. That
is why central bankers in particular, and the financial community
more broadly, generally believe that an increase in the quantity of
money tends to lower interest rates. Academic economists accept the
same conclusion, but for different reasons. They see, in their mind's
eye, a negatively sloping liquidity preference schedule. How can people
be induced to hold a larger quantity of money? Only by bidding down
interest rates.
Both are right, up to a point. The initial impact of increasing the
quantity of money at a faster rate than it has been increasing is to
make interest rates lower for a time than they would otherwise have
been. But this is only the beginning of the process not the end. The
more rapid rate of monetary growth will stimulate spending, both
through the impact on investment of lower market interest rates and
through the impact on other spending and thereby relative prices of
higher cash balances than are desired. But one man's spending is another
man's income. Rising income will raise the liquidity preference
schedule and the demand for loans; it may also raise prices, which
would reduce the real quantity of money. These three effects will
reverse the initial downward pressure on interest rates fairly promptly,
say, in something less than a year. Together they will tend, after
a somewhat longer interval, say, a year or two, to return interest
rates to the level they would otherwise have had. Indeed, given the tendency
for the economy to overreact, they are highly likely to raise interest
rates temporarily beyond that level, setting in motion a cyclical
adjustment process.
A fourth effect, when and if it becomes operative, will go even farther,
and definitely mean that a higher rate of monetary expansion will
correspond to a higher, not lower, level of interest rates than would
otherwise have prevailed. Let the higher rate of monetary growth produce
rising prices, and let the public come to expect that prices will
continue to rise. Borrowers will then be willing to pay and lenders will
then demand higher interest rates-as Irving Fisher pointed out decades
ago. This price expectation effect is slow to develop and also slow
to disappear. Fisher estimated that it took several decades for a full adjustment
and more recent work is consistent with his estimates.
These subsequent effects explain why every attempt to keep interest
rates at a low level has forced the monetary authority to engage in successively
larger and larger open market purchases. They explain why,
historically, high and rising nominal interest rates have been associated