violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to pursue his own interest
his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into competition
with those of any other man, or order of men [26, p. 651].ยน
3
These are doctrines with which, of course, we are all familiar. What
we sometimes overlook is that Smith in his exposition of economic
liberalism was the spokesman of an age that needed little persuasion to
accept his doctrines. Smith's was an age in which the individual had
acquired an institutional significance characteristic of no previous age
in English history. In the entire culture of the period the individual had
acquired a new importance as innovator, initiator, and doer. Man had
assumed responsibility for his own destiny and hence for society's
destiny, particularly in economic affairs. The ideas Smith so brilliantly
reduced to a systematic philosophy were not novel to the rapidly increasing
and increasingly important enterpreneurial class of his time.
Although Smith never engaged in business, during his sojourn in Glasgow
he associated intimately and continuously with businessmen. Glasgow
at that time was a thriving commercial and manufacturing center
whose industrial progress would have been gratifying to any modern
Chamber of Commerce. Nor were the businessmen, who were largely responsible
for its vigorous activity, indifferent to policy questions. The
more alert and public-spirited townsmen conducted a weekly discussion
club expressly designed to inquire into the nature and principles
of trade. Smith as a member made weekly contacts over a number of
years with an informed and articulate group of businessmen who had
assumed responsibility for the conduct of economic affairs. Smith's interest
in economic problems may well have stemmed from these associations,
and his ideas about these problems no doubt were shaped
in part by them.
No society is static. As E. Lipson, the economic historian, has said:
"Every social system contains within itself the seeds of its own decay;
it is always dissolving and reforming in an infinite sequence" [18,
p. 15]. While Smith was writing The Wealth of Nations, mercantilism,
the folly of which Smith so lucidly and logically exposed, was already
dissolving, and individualistic capitalism, the next sequence in the
inexorable march of economic change, had already passed its adolescence.
The restraints on the movement of labor, the restrictive rules
of apprenticeship, the prohibition of exports, and the tariff on imports
the whole scheme of mercantilist controls was already obsolete
and was rapidly passing into the limbo of outworn notions. Smith
gave it a push, but economic forces propelled it as no philosopher,
however potent his pen, could have done.


#### Split:
* Smith, of course, was wise and humane enough to recognize the limitations of competition
as a means of promoting the general welfare and to assign important functions
to the state.