to a level where its implications for policy become a matter of logic
rather than a vehicle for expressing personal tastes.10
Let us leap on to Marshall who brought up the rear of this tradition
as of so many others in English economics. He conceded an expanding
potential role to the state, in the control of monopoly, in the housing of
the poor, and in the treatment of poverty generally. Yet he persevered
in his preference for private enterprise wherever possible. The prefer-
ence rested heavily on the belief that bureaucratic management would
be burdensome and inefficient." Marshall at this point wrote the bold-
est sentence of his life:
If Governmental control had supplanted that of private enterprise a
hundred years ago [1807], there is good reason to suppose that our meth-
ods of manufacture now would be about as effective as they were fifty
years ago, instead of being perhaps four or even six times as efficient as
they were then.12
Yet the "good reason" was never presented, although it was more im-
portant to demonstrate this proposition if true than to answer any
other question to which Marshall devoted a chapter or a book or even
his life. Marshall's other reason for his distrust of government was the
fear that Parliament would become the creature of special interests,
and in particular of the Trade Unions¹³-an unknowing but not un-
knowledgeable reversion to Adam Smith!
13
So much for a century of laissez faire. The main school of economic
individualism had not produced even a respectable modicum of evi-
dence that the state was incompetent to deal with detailed economic
problems of any or all sorts. There was precious little evidence, indeed,
that the state was unwise in its economic activities, unless one was pre-


#### Split:
10 Mill's famous essay, On Liberty, does little to reduce our uncertainty. It is here that
he asserts:
Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided
the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting the ends.
The laws which, in many countries on the Continent, forbid marriage unless the par-
ties can show that they have the means of supporting a family, do not exceed the
legitimate powers of the State. ...
As the principle of the individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of Free
Trade . . . (The English Philosophers from Bacon to Mill [Modern Library 1939],
pp. 956, 1035, 1024).
It is not easy to avoid the conclusion that for Mill "liberty" was conveniently well cor-
related with the forms of behavior of which he personally approved.
Memorials of Alfred Marshall (1925), pp. 274-76, 339 ff.; Industry and Trade
(1919), pp. 666-72.
12 Memorials, p. 338.
13
18 Official Papers by Alfred Marshall (1926), pp. 395-96.