large share for government in total capital formation. Wages have
been subject to comprehensive control since 1945 and the advisory
Labor Foundation, representing centrally organized management and
labor groups has played a dominant role in the formulation of wage
policy [6, pp. 41-42]. The very great dependence of the Netherlands
on foreign trade makes the balance of payments a critical element in
stabilization policy and helps to assure that fiscal and monetary measures
designed to promote stability are not undermined by conflicting
wage and price policies. Dutch planning, moreover, is assisted by
highly competent technical advice which tends to be heeded by policymaking
authorities.

When one considers these and other examples of successful stabilzation
and growth policies in Western Europe it becomes clear that
their transfer to the United States would be impractical without very
large changes in institutional relationships. This does not mean that
successful stabilization policy is impossible in the United States but
it does mean that certain policy instruments are not available. Undoubtedly
the lack is most striking in the wage-price field which
Samuelson has called "the biggest unsolved economic problem of our
time [8, p. 360]." That this problem is not limited to the United
States is indicated by the plea of the OEEC experts on "The Problem
of Rising Prices" for a national wage policy.2 Nevertheless, both the
difficulties and our lack of progress in this area seem more striking
than elsewhere. In Norway and the Netherlands government participates
with centrally organized labor and management groups in the
formulation of a relatively successful national wage policy. In Sweden,
although wage rates are nationally negotiated without government.
participation, much attention is given to a wage policy designed to
stabilize prices at full employment [7, p. 93]. None of the countries.
of Western Europe has been able wholly to avoid "wage-drift" or an
upward price creep but this has tended to take place at 1.5 or 2 per
cent unemployment rather than at 4 to 5 per cent.

Certainly the difficulties confronting anything like a national wage
policy in this country are formidable. We lack the nationally organized
management and labor groups which are a necessary though not sufficient
condition. The significance of relative balance in international
payments which has made wage-price stability of critical importance
in a number of Western European countries has only recently become
apparent in the United States. Opposition in this country both in management


#### Split:

"In the view of the majority of the group, the essential element, to be stressed first of
all, is that the stabilization authorities must have a wages policy for dealing with the
problem of wages-just as they must have monetary and fiscal policies for dealing with
the problem of demand" [10, p. 56].
