world or its annual increase it is quite small. 21 The incidence of the 9
per cent over-all deterioration of the terms of trade on different areas
was, of course, very uneven. Latin America, for example, suffered a de-
terioration almost double the average, the Middle East none at all, and
the rest of Asia (excluding Japan) one much smaller than the average.
But even in the area hardest hit-Latin America—the “importing
power of exports" (volume of exports multiplied by terms of trade, also
called "capacity to import") has substantially increased throughout
the period of 1950 to 1960 [4, p. 61]. As has frequently happened in
the past, the impact of the change in the terms of trade on the primary
exporters was partly offset by a sharp decline in freight rates which
were very high in the early 1950's. 22 Since the middle of 1962, the inter-
national trade situation of the less developed countries has improved
greatly, prices of many primary products have risen substantially, the
terms of trade did not show any further deterioration, and export earn-
ings have registered sizable increases.
Nobody can be sure how long that improvement will continue and
how far it will go. But assuming that the industrial countries avoid
serious depressions and maintain a good rate of growth, barring further
revolutionary technological changes (such as the invention of cheap syn-
thetic coffee) and highly protectionist policies on the part of the indus-
trial countries under these not unreasonable assumptions the less de-
veloped countries can look forward to a continuously expanding market


#### Split:
21 Some may question the relevance of a comparison with national income. In my opinion,
it is relevant with certain qualifications: A large and sudden change in the terms of trade
might cause serious transitional difficulties. Or, if a country by extreme protectionism has
reduced its imports to a bare minimum and has neglected its export industries, a decline in
the terms of trade may necessitate a further reduction of imports which have already been
stripped to essentials. In that case the impact on GNP would be out of proportion to the
money cost of the deterioration quoted in the text because the "marginal benefit” of imports
would be much higher than the marginal benefit of domestic production. If my income falls
by 5 per cent and I were forced to skimp on food rather than spread the shortfall over
the whole range of expenditures, the result would be disastrous. But I doubt whether any
country really finds itself in such a predicament, although extreme protectionism could con-
ceivably put it there.
22 Charles Kindleberger has pointed out to me that a veritable revolution has taken place
in ocean transportation. Thus, while the world wholesale price index in dollars has about
doubled since before the war, oil tanker rates are just about where they were, and dry cargo
rates have gone up on a very rough average by 50 per cent. This great cheapening of trans-
port cost constitutes a powerful integrating force in the world economy and has bestowed
great benefits, especially on many less developed countries, by improving their f.o.b. terms
of trade.
The drastic reduction in transport cost, made possible by technological advances, applies
primarily to the very competitive international routes. Many countries rob themselves of
those very large benefits by highly protectionist shipping policies. This is especially true of
coastal shipping, including sometimes shipping between neighboring countries. For example,
freight rates between Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires are often as high as between Buenos
Aires and New York, because of nationalistic policies. See [8, p. 297].
The jet aircraft promises to produce another revolutionary advance in transport technology.