12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
Shifts in new media of communication have been characterized by pro-
found disturbances, and the shift to radio has been no exception. An
emphasis on continuity and time, in contrast with an emphasis on space,
demands a concern with bureaucracy, planning, and collectivism. Without
experience in meeting these demands, and appeal is made to organized
force as an instrument of continuity. . . . Lack of experience with prob-
lems of continuity and empire threatens the Western world with un-
certainty and war" (The Bias of Communication, pp. 188-89).
The tragedy of Innis is the abrupt halt to work in process by one at
the height of his powers. The loss is the greater because of the author's
attitude toward the written tradition, an attitude which makes prospects
for completion of his edifice of thought by others exceedingly dim.
Those familiar with his writings need no introduction to his method-
the amassing, sifting of evidence, the intuitive flash with connection
between fact and conclusion seldom clear, finally the process of working
back, establishing the connection so that others may see, communicating
more effectively with those who care to read. The brevity of this phase
of increasing intelligibility may lessen the immediate impact of his
thought and writings, but I doubt that it will reduce the force of impact
in the long run, however long run be defined.
There is one aspect of his later thought which should be stressed,
and that is the tendency to turn more directly to consideration of the
interrelations of economic and cultural elements. There are clear indi-
cations in his more recent writings, including the unfinished paper that
follows, and in conversations with him over the past year, of increas-
ing concentration on the implications of changes in communications
for economic thought and policy; questions concerning the consequences
of disequilibrium in the communications area for the study of business
disturbance, the strength of nationalism in economic writings ("What
produces economists?"), bring out very clearly the direction in which
he was proceeding at the end.
Looking back on the course he pursued so steadily, I find it diffi-
cult to escape the conclusion that some such road as that he followed is
the road all economic historians will follow, if they go far enough.
W. T. EASTERBROOK
University of Toronto
III
It is not possible to discuss in a few pages Harold Innis' contribution
to scholarship. I can only hint at it. Perhaps I can best do that by
acknowledging the great debt which The Rockefeller Foundation owes
him. He, seconded by Anne Bezanson, a Canadian on this side of the
border, guided our modest grants in Canada.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
