to answer the question “Does the Neutrino Really Exist?" [11, pp.
139-41] laconically with "Who cares?" and to explain that any belief
in the “real existence" of atoms, electrons, neutrinos, and all the rest,
would hold up the progress of our knowledge. Some biologists working
in genetics warned, after empirical genes were discovered, that these
"operational genes" should not be confused with the "hypothetical
genes," which had been useful constructs in explanatory models before
the discovery of any empirical referents [42, p. 814]. Economists,
however, know for sure that firms exist as empirical entities and,
hence, they have a hard time keeping the theoretical firm and the em-
pirical firm apart.
For certain economic problems the existence of the firm is of the es-
sence. For example, if we study the size distribution of firms or the
growth of the firm, the organization and some of its properties and
processes are the very objects of the investigation. In such studies we
insist on a high degree of correspondence between the model (the
thought-object) and the observed object. For other problems, however,
as for problems of competitive-price theory, any likeness between the
theoretical construct of the firm and the empirical firm is purely coin-
cidental.
Economists trained in scientific methodology understand this clear-
ly. I might quote a dozen or more writers, but will confine myself to
one quotation, which states that "in economic analysis, the business
firm is a postulate in a web of logical connections" [15, p. 196]. Let
me add the statement of another writer, who however was plaintiff
rather than advocate when he wrote that "It is a fascinating paradox
that the received theory of the firm, by and large, assumes that the
firm does not exist" [45, p. 249].
Here is what I wrote on one of the several occasions when I have
discussed this problem:
the firm in the model world of economic micro-theory ought not to
call forth any irrelevant associations with firms in the real world. We
know, of course, that there are firms in reality and that they have boards
of directors and senior and junior executives, who do, with reference to
hundreds of different products, a great many things-which are entirely
irrelevant for the microtheoretical model. The fictitious firm of the model
is a "uni-brain," an individual decision-unit that has nothing to do but
adjust the output and the prices of one or two imaginary products to very
simple imagined changes in data [26, p. 133].
I went on, of course, to say that this purely fictitious single-minded
firm, helpful as it is in competitive-price theory, will not do so much
for us in the theory of monopoly and oligopoly. To explain and predict
price reactions under monopoly and oligopoly we need more than the