For purposes of illustration let us reproduce in a literary form the
utility function of a management (perhaps of its "peak coordinator"
[28, pp. 190-91]) in full control and confident that stockholders will
not make any fuss as long as the firm makes a "normal" profit and
pays out a fair share of it in dividends. Total utility, which the man-
ager by his decisions will try to maximize, will be a function of a large
number of variables, by virtue of the contributions they make to his
pride, prestige, self-esteem, conscience, comfort, feeling of accomplish-
ment, material consumption, and anticipations of future benefits and
pleasures. Among the variables may be total profits of the firm, growth
rate of profits, rate of profits to investment, total sales, growth rate of
sales, increase in market share, dividends paid out, retained earnings,
increase in market value of stock, price-earnings ratio of stock, invest-
ment outlay, salary and bonus received, stock options received (capital
gains), expense accounts (consumption at company expense), services
received (automobile, chauffeur, lovely secretary, theatre tickets, con-
ferences at resorts), size of staff, expenses for public relations and ad-
vertising, expenses for research and development, technological and
other innovations, leadership in wage increases and good industrial re-
lations, expenses for public or private education and health, other con-
tributions to public interest and patriotic causes, free time for leisure
and recreation, and indications of influence over government, industry,
and society. This list of variables is, of course, only representative, not
exhaustive.¹
12
Now what can one do with a utility function of this sort? Will it be
of much use in telling us what the firm will do with its freedom of ac-
tion if it has to respond to a change in conditions?
The answer will depend partly on a simple condition, namely,
whether the acceptable trade-off ratios between all the factors con-
tributing to total utility remain unchanged, or approximately the same,
if any one of them, say, total profit, increases. If this were the case, we
could shout hurrah or sigh a sigh of relief (depending on our tempera-
ment). For, if the marginal rates of substitution among all the various
“utilifactors” are constant, the distribution of funds among them will
remain unchanged with changes in conditions that increase or decrease
the total of funds available. Only if the cost of any of the factors
wasteful, that is, contributing nothing, and economizing nothing but managerial effort or
capability.
This list may be suggestive of the actions that may have to be taken when, after years
of ease and growth, the firm finds its profits declining or disappearing.
12
Perhaps there ought to be a place on the list for some gratifications that are more
stable, less subject to quantitative variation, such as the pleasure of being known for
honesty and fairness, on the one hand, and for sharpness and shrewdness, on the other,
or at least the pleasure of being convinced of having and exercising these qualities. And
last, though not least, there is the general feeling of gratification from "running" a large,
well-known profitable, widely respected firm with growing assets and employment.