problem only if it can be shown that in the absence of these interests
the problem would in fact be solved. Certain modern Marxists, for
example, with a Keynesian slant, hold that persistent stagnation must
be our fate because, although government spending could fill the gap
supposedly caused by an inadequacy of investment opportunities,
private interests in the perpetuation of traditional government-business
relations will not permit it to play this role. But to make a case
for this view, it would be necessary to demonstrate that, (a) in the
absence of a large increase in public spending, investment opportunities
will in fact fall short of absorbing the intended volume of savings;
(b) under these circumstances business interests will be better served
by persistent stagnation than by any practical change in the role of
government that could overcome stagnation; and (c) business has
sufficient political power to impose its interests on the public. To the
extent, however, that each of the propositions is shrouded in doubt,
the significance to be attached to the role of vested or special interests
becomes far from clear.
Parenthetically, it is a matter of some interest that the Marxian
analysis of capitalism seems to have subtly shifted from an emphasis
on the economic "“laws” of capitalist development which must inevitably
bring to a close this stage of history to an emphasis on the socioeconomic
structure of political power which will inhibit the use of any
governmental measures that might be expected to make capitalism
work.
To say, however, that the recognition of a substantial area of ignorance
somewhat modifies our interpretation of the role of interests and
ideologies is not to deny that interests and ideologies significantly
limit and influence the choice of stabilization policies. As any reader
of the public prints or of testimony before the Joint Economic Committee
knows, quite different analyses of the reasons for the current
stagnation and quite different recommendations for action emanate
from business and labor groups. And quite different explanations of
the "secret" of Western European growth rates are advanced.
It is difficult to characterize what is after all a fairly wide spectrum
of business opinion, but typically two considerations dominate the
business arguments: the burden of taxation on savings and investment
and the power of trade unions to push up wage rates. It follows that
any significant revamping of the tax structure should reduce the corporate
income tax and the upper brackets of the personal income tax
and if possible shift some of the burden from direct to indirect taxes.
Even with this additional inducement to invest the economy will
quickly tend to run into inflation unless something is done to curb the
power of trade unions to push up wage rates. Since investment rather