WILLIAMS: AN ECONOMIST'S CONFESSIONS
9
seemed to me peculiarly inapt as a starting point for an analysis of
growth and change, and in this regard inferior to the classical theory it
was intended to supplant.
It is not surprising therefore that one major feature of contemporary
economic thinking is the attempt to dynamize the Keynesian statics.
We now have, for example, from ardent Keynesians, books with such
titles as "Towards a Dynamic Economics," which on inspection turn
out to be business-cycle theory. Here again, I must make a confession.
I had thought that while comparatively few theorists, notably Schumpe-
ter and Marx, had tried to do anything with long-run theories of
change-long-run change has been left mainly to the historians and the
statisticians the business-cycle theorists had for half a century and
more been concerned with the dynamics of short-run change. I had not
thought it unfortunate that, as business-cycle theory developed, its
relation to classical equilibrium theory had become increasingly tenu-
ous. This seemed to me one of the major ways in which economic
thinking had been seeking to come once again in touch with the reali-
ties of economic life; and one of my main questions about Keynes had
been whether he had done economics a service or a disservice in at-
tempting to push the analysis of economic fluctuations back into an
abstract framework of equilibrium theory. As I said in my paper four
years ago, I hoped and believed that we would find ourselves bringing
back the things he temporarily submerged, the study of the processes
of short- and long-run change, the emphasis on growth and productivity,
and on price-cost-profit relationships.
Now this process is in full swing, and classes in the colleges that
earlier had dealt mainly with Keynes' General Theory are wrestling
with the business-cycle theories of Hicks, Harrod, and other leading
Keynesians. In the process, Keynesian thinking has undergone further
pronounced changes. It comes with rather a start to find men, who
probably still regard themselves as Keynesians, or as having drawn
their main inspiration from him, writing books about the economic
characteristics of an expanding economy, and to find, as is true of both
the Hicks and the Harrod versions of the cycle, an assumption of a
rising floor of autonomous investment. Surely this is a far cry from
the 'thirties. It is true that the language remains, and the income equa-
tion still stands, as it always must as an identity equation, but I am
not able to reconcile the assumption of a rising level of autonomous
investment, providing ever higher bottoms for depressions, and spring-
boards for bigger booms. To explain the booms, induced investment
8
* See J. R. Hicks, A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle (London, Oxford
University Press, 1950); and R. F. Harrod, Towards a Dynamic Economics (London,
Macmillan, 1948).
