THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
Germany or in the United Kingdom as big as some individual corpora-
tions in the United States, but this could perhaps be overlooked as
irrelevant. It was, nevertheless, a little puzzling to observe the way in
which the economic measures of Roosevelt and Truman which had been
considered so destructively anticapitalistic by our industrialists were
overlooked, at least momentarily, while the United States was pointed
to as the peerless model of competition and laissez faire.
This fading away among our industrialists of their sense of catas-
trophe at what the New Deal had done to our economic system and their
renewed confidence in the vitality of the American free enterprise sys-
tem have no doubt been greatly accentuated by the Republican victory
over the Democratic administration in the 1952 election. What is of
greater significance to us is the way in which economists in the last six
or eight years seem to have shifted their own point of view in respect
to these matters. There has been a pronounced swing among economists
away from the position that monopoly and quasimonopoly in its various
forms and manifestations, and imperfections and impurities in compe-
tition, are perhaps as great or even of greater importance in the econ-
omy than is competition itself.
The reason for this shift has not been so much any change in what
economists consider to be the actual institutional character of our
system. I doubt whether the necessarily incomplete data which we have
on the degree of concentration in industry and on the extent to which
the degree of concentration has or has not changed through time or
the difficulties in interpreting these data have been determinative. Of
greater importance has been the dissatisfaction of economists with the
various models of imperfect competition, monopolistic competition,
oligopoly and so on. To the extent that these have been offered as repre-
senting both reality and universality economists were bound to doubt
whether they were as useful as the traditional competitive model.
What I have called a "swing" among economists may reflect no more
than the impact which we have all felt of the ideas expressed by Stigler,
Friedman, Slichter and others, who hold that our economy is still in the
main competitive and that an economic theory which has developed on
this assumption need not be substantially altered to fit reasonably
effectively the actually existing system.
It is not quite clear whether our system is supposed still to be char-
acteristically competitive because our antitrust and related legislation
and its administration has in fact been quite efficient in maintaining
competition or whether the position is that competition is bound to
maintain itself pretty much regardless of the law and its administration.
The various positions of economists on these interrelated questions
become more than a little difficult to sort out. Galbraith, for example,
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:10:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
