legal but absentee owners, the continuity of its management, and its
legal autonomy, it has afforded almost an ideal instrument for carrying
on large-scale production and larger-scale business enterprise. It has
made possible three great combination or merger movements that have
changed the structure of American industry: the merger movement
between 1897 and 1903, the merger movement of the 1920's, and the
current merger movement, in progress since the close of the second
world war. Economists have differed sharply as to the effect of these
movements on competition, and less sharply as to their effect
on industrial concentration. On the latter issue the differences of
opinion that existed a few years ago now seem largely reconciled. No
student of industrial history will challenge the statement that at the
turn of the century the Great Combination Movement concentrated
the output of many basic industries in a smaller number of firms than
had previously controlled it. In truth it would seem no exaggeration
to say that no other period of industrial history, in a time so brief,
has experienced so great a transformation in the structure of industry.
Similarly, most students accept the findings of Berle and Means that
in the period from 1924 to 1929 the assets of the 200 largest business
corporations increased more rapidly than the assets of all other busi-
ness corporations [8, p. 35]. Morris Adelman's study [1] revealed a
decrease in industrial concentration from 1933 to 1947, but the merger
movement of the current decade has reversed that trend.³
A significant characteristic of the merger movements is that each has
taken place in the face of a law designed to prevent it. The Sherman
Act voiced the fear of a rural and small-town citizenry that combina-
tions threatened the opportunity and even the survival of the small
businessman and endangered the welfare of the farmer. Despite its
comprehensive prohibition of every combination in restraint of trade
regardless of the form it took, the Sherman Act proved helpless to stay
the movement inaugurated by the trusts of the 1880's and carried to
completion by the corporations of the 1890's. The merger movement
of the 1920's followed on the heels of a Congressional effort to make
good the deficiencies of the Sherman Act; Section 7 of the Clayton Act
prohibited the acquisition of stock by one corporation in another where
the effect would be to lessen competition between the two companies.
3
Census figures show a slight increase in concentration between 1947 and 1954 for
industries producing specialized products [23], and that in 1954 the country's 200
largest companies accounted for 37 per cent of the total value added by manufacture
as against 30 per cent in 1947 [25, p. 11]. Adelman, who in his 1951 study [1] was
severely critical of the measurements of industrial concentration employed by the Federal
Trade Commission, defends the Census statistics as "a valuable addition to our stock
of basic information" and "sound in concept"; but he misreads them as showing that
"Concentration did not increase from 1947 to 1954" [2].