38
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
1950, nor for the noncomparability of the published U.S.D.A. per
capita farm and nonfarm income statistics. If the chart on the front
cover were to read “Operator's Income" instead of “Operators' In-
come" the slope of it from 1951 to 1955 would be quite different.
The Short-Run (10-year) Phase
The objective over this longer period is to get the agricultural pro-
duction of this country fully into balance with market demand, in
general, and product by product. It is here assumed that it will take
about ten years to get present surplus stocks entirely liquidated and to
extensify agricultural production on enough land so that surpluses will
not be arising currently from year to year. The set of related actions
which need to be taken, properly integrated with the emergency-phase
actions just outlined, is as follows:
1. The set of flexible prices to be used as a basis for compensatory
payments needs to be analyzed more fully and tested in actual appli-
cation. The schedule of adjustment for volume of output should allow
the total return per unit to fall at such a rate that this return times
volume of output will give no larger a net return to the producer for
a large output than for an average one, and preferably somewhat less,
so that there will be something of a penalty for overproducing. This
will mean in effect keeping the total per-unit return from falling as
sharply as it otherwise would in the market place, but not placing
a premium on excess production as rigid price supports do, or even a
schedule of supports mildly declining with volume. This schedule of
course needs to be worked out for each product separately according to
the slope of its particular supply-price curve. At present, one schedule
is applied to all.
2. This compensatory payment program can be extended to addi-
tional products if the need for it becomes clear or arises because of
new developments.
3. A carry-over program needs to be worked out fitted to each
product. This involves determining whether there is a national interest,
commodity by commodity, in larger carry-overs than the private trade
is willing to carry, and how much larger.
4. The program for distribution of food at home through schools
and to low-income families needs to be developed further by testing
out different procedures; likewise the program for food to aid in the
development of backward countries.
5. The emergency soil bank program will need to be merged with the
Agricultural Conservation Program, and both of them closely inte-
grated with the Farm and Home Development Program of the Agri-
cultural Extension Service and the Soil Conservation Service Program.
