formation by pressure from stockholders to maintain dividend rates.
Post-war tax collections by the federal government will probably be at
least twice pre-war. The additional amounts will be collected largely
from the middle incomes. 13 Much of the saving of recent years has been
temporary rather than permanent. This is true of the saving repre-
sented by premiums for life insurance, annuities, and pensions which
in the main are intended to be consumed rather than to provide perma-
nent sources of income. Benefit payments of life insurance companies
are gradually catching up with their premium receipts and eventually
the difference between the two will be little greater than the operating
expenses of the companies. 14
Too much importance, however, must not be attached to prospective
changes in the consumption function. If there is a decline in the dis-
position to take risks in order to increase capital, and a rise in the desire
to avoid risks in order to conserve capital, a drop in thriftiness may be
accompanied by a rise in unemployment.15 The large shift in the con-
12 It is not generally known that throughout the recovery until 1939 dividend disburse-
ments each year exceeded corporate earnings by a billion dollars or more.
13
3 Satisfactory data are not available for estimating how much a higher tax burden would
reduce savings in the middle incomes. One may roughly estimate, however, that in the case
of incomes from $10,000 to $50,000 a year every additional dollar taken in taxes will reduce
the volume of saving by 25 to 50 cents. The higher taxes will tend also to affect the slope of
the function, making less pronounced the rise in the volume of savings which accompanies
a rise in income. It might appear that this change, while making the economy more
responsive to any stimulus, would also make it more unstable. This tendency will be
largely offset, however, by the spread of unemployment insurance.
14 Prior to 1929 the premiums of life insurance companies were increasing far faster than
payments to policyholders. Between 1929 and 1940 the payments of life insurance companies
to policyholders increased more than premium payments. Between 1929 and 1940 total
premium income of life insurance companies increased from 3,350 million dollars to 3,944
million dollars, or 594 million dollars. Payments to policyholders increased from 1,962
million dollars to 2,681 million dollars, or 719 million dollars. (The Spectator Life Insurance
Yearbook, 1935, pp. 414-15; and 1941, p. i.)
The disposition to save in years immediately after the war will be affected by the extent
to which individuals and business enterprises reduce their debts during the war. Reduction
of private indebtedness will assist in financing the war, provided creditors put the proceeds
into government bonds. Reduction in mortgage indebtedness and installment debts should
be encouraged both to finance the war and to create the basis for a high level of con-
sumption in the years after the war.
A large rise in the price level during the war may have the net effect of raising the
post-war propensity to save, because it will probably induce some attempts to restore the
purchasing power of savings or of the income from savings.
15 This is simply one way of saying that a favorable shift in the consumption function
may be offset by an unfavorable shift in the schedule of liquidity preference. The desire
for security of principal will be satisfied to a considerable extent by holding idle cash in
the event that venture capital is not sufficiently abundant to provide a satisfactory cushion
for new fixed income securities. There are several elements in thriftiness and they may
change in relative importance. The kind of thriftiness that does most good is that which is
based upon an attempt to increase one's capital.
It is possible, of course, to have steadily increasing unemployment because of an
insufficiency of savings. The annual increments of investment-seeking funds may not be