4
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
the great depression a good deal of work was done on this phase of
economic theory. But unfortunately since the early 1930's little atten-
tion has been paid to the subject. Surely it is time economists took it up
again.
I want therefore to indicate what a modernized version of Mill's last
chapter would entail. I propose to do so by noting some of the main
points in addition to those relating to monopoly and to inadequate
aggregate demand-that it should deal with. These points can conven-
iently be grouped under two heads, those that relate particularly to the
working of the profit system and those that relate primarily to the way
competition works.
Let us take the profit-system points first. The working of the profit
system is inevitably conditioned by the legal rules that govern the con-
duct of business and by the business practices that have developed
under those rules. Satisfactory operation of the profit system assumes
that what is profitable is also good public policy and that what is good
public policy is also profitable. Of course this assumption is true only
to the extent that we have developed legal rules and practices under
those rules that make it true. And it is scarcely conceivable that the
rules and practices that have developed could be so perfect that what is
profitable and what is good public policy would completely coincide.
But to the extent that they do not, there are deficiencies in the way our
economic institutions perform basic central-management functions, de-
ficiencies in the way the profit system works, most of which are not
suggested by the model-analysis type of statement of the free-enter-
prise way of organizing economic activity.
Let me cite a number of illustrations or ways in which our legal sys-
tem and practices within the law have been responsible historically for
significant divergences between what is profitable and what is good
public policy. I will cite them but for the sake of brevity I will not stop
here to consider, case by case, what has been done toward correcting
these defects in our scheme of pecuniary incentives.
1. Petroleum and natural gas resources. As has been pointed out by
various students of these resources, notably Joseph E. Pogue, the ap-
plication of the so-called wild animal theory of property to our subsoil
mineral rights has led to competitive drilling and a consequent waste
both in the excessive number of wells drilled and in the needlessly in-
complete extraction and utilization of the oil and gas.²
2. Short-term leases. As A. C. Pigou has so clearly explained in his
Economics of Welfare, it is nearly impossible to draw a short-term lease
J. E. Pogue, Economics of Petroleum (New York, 1921), Ch. 3 and 28. See also C. G.
Gilbert and J. E. Pogue, The Energy Resources of the United States: A Field for Re-
construction, U.S. National Museum Bull. 102, Vol. I, 1919, esp. pp. 84 ff.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:15:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
