tious aim. The theory of prices and allocation, viewed as a theory of
adjustment to change, does not call for impossible performances. 15 I
ask you to remember what I spelled out, twenty years ago, about the
difference between exact estimates and calculations, on the one hand,
and "sizing up" in nonnumerical terms, on the other [21, pp. 524-25,
534-35]. And I ask you to realize how many more good predictions
can be made on the basis of the assumption that firms try to maximize
their profits than on the basis of the assumption that they want no
more than satisfactory profits. Take one illustration: if an easy-money
policy is introduced, we expect that some firms will increase their borrowings,
some firms will increase their purchases, some firms will sell
at higher prices, and some firms will increase their output. But if everybody
was satisfied before the change, we cannot infer any of these
things. On the other hand, if we assume that firms prefer a larger
profit to a smaller one, all the mentioned consequences follow from the
simple model.
The Twenty-one Concepts of the Firm
Several times in this paper I have spoken of the fallacy of misplaced
concreteness, committed by mistaking a thought-object for an object
of sense perception, that is, for anything in the real, empirical world.
My warnings might have given rise to another confusion, namely, that
there are only two concepts of the firm. There are many more, and I
do not wish to suppress altogether my strong taxonomic propensities. I
shall offer a list of ten different contexts calling for even more different
concepts, some theoretical, some more empirical.
One of my favorite philosophers, who was a past-master of the art
of making fine distinctions, enumerated 13 concepts of "pragmatism"
[18], 66 concepts of "nature" [19, pp. 447-56], and "a great
number" of concepts of "God.”16 I am sure there are at least 21 concepts
of the firm employed in the literature of business and economics,


#### Split:
15
Suppose the government imposes a 15 per cent surcharge on all import duties. The
theory of the profit-maximizing firm will without hesitation tell us that imports will decline.
What will the theory of the satisficing firm tell us? "Models of satisficing behavior
are richer than models of maximizing behavior, because they treat not only of equilibrium
but of the method of reaching it as well. Psychological studies of the formation and change
of aspiration levels support propositions of the following kinds. (a) When performance
falls short of the level of aspiration, search behavior (particularly search for new alternatives
of action) induced. (b) At the same time, the level of aspiration begins to adjust
itself downward until goals reach levels that are practically attainable. (c) If the
two mechanisms just listed operate too slowly to adapt aspirations to performance, emotional
behavior-apathy or aggression, for example-will replace rational adaptive behavior"
[40, p. 263]. I admit that this is an unfair use of the theory of satisficing, but
I wanted to show that everything has its place and no theory can be suitable to all
problems. I suspect, however, that Simon's theory of satisficing behavior will yield neither
quantitative nor qualitative predictions.
16
'Lovejoy Denied Approval by Senate Group," The Baltimore Sun, April 1, 1951.