and exploitable reserves which remain underinventoried, and upon
man's ability to develop substitutes for current sources. Even so, the
outlook is not as promising as our Indian Summer natural-resource ex-
perts would have it. Consider water, long the economist's standard ex-
emplar of a free good. We Americans use in all forms over 370 billion
gallons of water per day and by 2000 we shall require 900 billion gal-
lons, which probably can be provided out of the 700 billion available
of the 1,200 billion that daily flow to the sea [40]. This amount, to-
gether with what is otherwise required and used of an average daily
rainfall of about 5 trillion gallons, will not suffice beyond the present
century. Then we shall have to reduce our average consumption, so
imbedded in our mode of living, since it is improbable that desalina-
tion of sea water can add greatly to our supply of appropriately situ-
ated water.
The long-run availability of large-volume materials (e.g., steel,
aluminum, concrete, ceramics, glass), together with our ability to cope
with shortages of special small-volume materials, depends, as F. G.
Tryon [15, pp. 136-38] suggested 40 years ago, upon man's ability to
produce and appropriately distribute cheap energy. Under present con-
ditions and at prospective use rates, the world's exploitable reserves of
a number of minerals will last less than a century. Aluminum and iron
would last 4 centuries at recent use rates, and the key fertilizers, potas-
sium and phosphorus, much longer. The World Power Conference of
1962 put economically exploitable coal reserves at 3.5 trillion tons,
enough for 800 years at current annual world consumption rates
(about 4.4 billion tons in 1960) and 100 years at American rates.
Other fossil fuels will last only into the next century. Water power
could supply the equivalent of 2.5 billion tons of coal per year, or less
than half current world energy consumption. Given breeder reactors,
usable uranium might come close to supplying as much energy as cur-
rent mineral or fossil fuel reserves; and low-grade thorium could sup-
ply 10-20 times as much. Fusion, when it becomes manageable, could
make the supply of energy virtually inexhaustible, even in the absence
of tidal, solar, geothermic, and related sources [27] [33, pp. 74-97].
In short, given the cheap energy likely to be available, shortage of
space, land, and water rather than of minerals would check the growth
of population and living standards. Limits will be imposed also, of
course, by unavoidable shortages of skilled personnel. Even given re-
quisite natural talents, we cannot long increase skilled manpower fast-
er than population; otherwise the whole of the labor force will be
transformed into economists, engineers, physicians, and other cat-
egories of skilled manpower, and none will be left to minister to other
wants.