22
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
to recognize small denominations. In the Yukon Territory as late as
1926 coins smaller than 25 cents were regarded with disfavour. The
drive for cheaper information regarding prices, especially in depart-
ment stores, had important implications for the currency structure and
for velocity of circulation. The broad implications of prices of newsprint
for the distribution of information in large cities were paralleled by
developments on a wider field. During the second world war high cable
rates to Australia were reduced by subsidy and the position of Australia
in the information field greatly strengthened whereas the high rates to
Spain were said to play an important rôle in keeping Franco out of
the war.
An increase in the circulation of newspapers and a policy of low fixed
prices designed to facilitate increased circulation were paralleled by the
increasing importance of advertising as a source of revenue and the
necessity of developing policies to attract advertising. The newspapers
played an important rôle in the building up of the great department
stores as distributing organizations and also in changes in the methods
of production. In England for example the Daily Mail found itself
faced with the problem of finding industries with a productive capacity
adequate to the demands of purchasers created by advertising. Drapers
as advertisers were limited by their capacities to supply particular
articles. In a systematic search for industries with relatively inex-
haustible capacities of production the Daily Mail concentrated on the
building industry and on a system of advertising developed beyond the
immediate possibilities of the paper itself. The Ideal Home Exhibition
was organized to supplement the newspaper. The newspaper is con-
cerned in a search for mass production industries to meet its advertising
requirements. Its position leads it to take a critical attitude towards
trusts as narrowing the market or towards the domination of govern-
ment by powerful groups. Edward W. Bok concentrated his attention
on the position of women as purchasers. He was said to have changed
the physical appearance of domestic furniture, eliminated the parlor
from domestic architecture and persuaded the Castles to introduce more
and better dances.³
COMMENT
*
HAROLD INNIS
During the summer I talked to my father a good deal and on several oc-
casions we discussed the subject of his presidential address to this Associa-
* See Wareham Smith, Spilt Ink (London, 1932), pp. 67 ff.
* For a discussion of the suit of Lever Brothers against Northcliffe see Smith, ibid.
8 Lloyd Morris, Postscript to Yesterday-the Last Fifty Years (New York, 1947), pp.
269-75.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
