for their exports, and a sharp deterioration of their terms of trade com-
parable to what happened in the 1930's is virtually excluded.
I should add that this fairly optimistic appraisal relates only to the
international trade position of the less developed countries.23 Far be it
from me to belittle the severe handicaps from which many less de-
veloped countries suffer, such as poor natural resources and bad cli-
mate, population pressure, political and social instability, and, I am
afraid one has to add, exceedingly bad economic policies. All I have
said was that a shrinking or stagnant world market has not been among
the handicaps since the war.
VII. Outlook for the Future
Instead of summarizing what I have said, let me try to peer a little
into the future. Since economists are not endowed with the gift of
prophecy, I shall not try to predict what will happen to world trade in
the future but do the next best thing and suggest what would be the
course of events if certain conditions are fulfilled.
I see no reason why the the growth of world trade and the ever closer
integration of the major areas of the world should not continue if two
conditions are met. The first, basic requirement is maintenance of a
high level of employment and growth in the industrial countries. On
this nothing more need be added, except to say that to me the chances
look good that this condition will be fulfilled. But it is a necessary, not
a sufficient, condition. At least in the larger countries economic activity
could grow quite satisfactorily (although not at the highest attainable
speed) without a corresponding growth of trade.
The second presupposition is further liberalization of trade or, as a
minimum, avoidance of increases in trade barriers for balance-of-pay-
ments or protectionist reasons. I am afraid we cannot be so sure about
this condition being met as about the first. Balance-of-payments
23


#### Split:
3 W. Arthur Lewis has reached similar conclusions in two important papers [9] [10].
Speaking of Latin America, he said: "Puzzling are those cries which seem to be founded on
the belief that it is particularly difficult to expand exports because the world is buying
fewer and fewer exports. The opposite is true. World trade has never grown faster. Between
1950 and 1960 the quantum of world trade in primary products increased at an average
rate of 6 per cent per annum, and the quantum of world trade in manufacturers by more
than 7 per cent per annum. The terms of trade for primary products could not retain the
heights to which they were raised by the speculative fever of the Korean War and the heavy
American stockpiling in the early fifties; nevertheless the average terms of trade for the
decade of the nineteen-fifties were better than for any previous decade in all the preceding
hundred years. I do not know whether it is in fact true that in the 1950's, Latin America
had difficulty in keeping her exports growing at the same rate as national income but if
this was so, it cannot possibly have been due to failure of world demand to grow ade-
quately, since the quantum of world trade was growing by about 7 per cent per annum
throughout the 1950's. Taking the continent as a whole, rather than individual countries,
failure on this score can only have been a failure of effort" [10, pp. 10-11].