4
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIĆ REVIEW
These tendencies reflect a concern with information. They are supported
by the text-book industry and other industries which might be described
as information industries. Information is provided in vast quantities in
libraries, encyclopaedias, and books. It is disseminated in universities by
the new media of communication including moving pictures, loud speak-
ers, with radio and television in the offing. Staff and students alike are
tested in their ability to disseminate and receive information.
Later in the same paper he said:
The blight of lying and subterfuge in the interest of budgets has fallen
over universities, and pleas are made on the grounds that universities are
valuable because they keep the country safe from socialism, they help the
farmers and industry, they help in measures of defence. Now of course
they do no such thing and when such topics are mentioned you and I
are able to detect the odour of dead fish. Culture is not concerned with
these questions. It is designed to train the individual to decide how much
information he needs and how little he needs, to give him a sense of
balance and proportion, and to protect him from the fanatic.
Veblen in The Higher Learning in America was not more scathing;
but Innis was perhaps more hopeful, and more helpful. For these are
only his words. We who worked with him in the University can testify
to deeds and to a powerful influence for good in the councils of the
University, and above all in personal discussion.
Harold Innis was a scholar of tremendous industry. Not content
with books and documents he travelled all over the Dominion to get the
feel of that economic life about which he wrote. Typical of such activity
was his toilsome and dangerous journey down the Mackenzie River.
I still remember his pleasure when he heard himself described as the
best deck-hand in the North. His publications are so many that the
preparation of a complete bibliography will require considerable work.
The land marks were: The History of the Canadian Pacific Railway
(1923), The Fur Trade in Canada (1930), Settlement and the Mining
Frontier (1936), The Cod Fisheries (1940), and Empire and Com-
munications (1950). Two volumes of collected papers from which many
of the quotations in this tribute have come should be noted: Political
Economy and the Modern State (1946) and The Bias of Communica-
tion (1951). A final volume of essays, Changing Concepts of Time
(1953) published a few days after his death is a monument to his
courage. He had revised the papers and read the proofs in spite of his
illness. So had he driven himself all his life. Though his industry was
tremendous, hard work never dulled his imagination. He knew the
facts, and he recited them in his writings: but his was not that anti-
quarianism, that "useless accumulation of useful facts," which he
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
