by the short-cut method of authoritarian determinations. At home,
an essentially similar proposal appears on the agenda of our own
more outright economic planners.
The grand objective of general welfare which plan economy sets up
must commend itself to all good men. But not all good economists
accept the proposed methods of government-directed activity and government-
regulated prices as the only or even the surest way of reaching
these goals. Some of us see reasons for believing that these age-old
aspirations of humankind may yet be brought to scientifically more
tenable and socially more tolerable expression in the institutions of
the private market, revamped in the light of our growing knowledge.
"
With a wary eye over my shoulder at Professor Viner brandishing
his closing warning against those who put "old poisons in new bottles,'
I wish to consider the possibility of reconciling the two ideas, sublimated
objective value on the one side, and the processes of the free
market on the other. The context in which I wish to discuss this issue
is that provided by Professor Slichter's presidential address of last
year, namely, the possibility of sustained peacetime prosperity after the
war rather than a repetition of the deep "depression and disappointing
recovery" that followed the First World War. I am happy also to
fall in step with him by making my approach in terms of “policies and
institutions” as factors in the problem, which are at once significant
for the outcome and amenable to control, or at least effective modification,
by ourselves.
I recognize that this personalized, not to say chatty, style for a
presidential address is not quite within the austere tradition of our
Association. But since an innovation as to the time and place of presenting
this address was thrust upon us, I see no reason why we should
not venture an innovation modifying also the character of the offering.
May not something be said for regarding the remarks of the presidents
of the Association in successive years as intellectual link-relatives
rather than as discrete literary phenomena?
I
Economists of my generation were brought up in the tradition of
the "price-organized society" or "exchange coöperation," in a preponderantly
laissez-faire setting. We have lived-I trust not beyond
our time to experience the realities of a society whose economic life
is by no means ordered by mere behavioristic responses to free-running
market influences. Perhaps our economic system today cannot be regarded
as predominantly characterized by determinations even nominally
based on free market prices. Not only may the government,


#### Split:
* "The Conditions of Expansion," Am. Econ. Rev., Vol. XXXII (Mar., 1942), pp. 1-21.