quality of the life lived. Physical environment, occupational status, and
skill in choosing and using goods have much to do with the volume
and composition of consumption required to yield a given level or
content of living. Equal or equivalent aggregates of goods consumed do
not insure equivalent planes of living for the thrifty and the spendthrift,
the sober and the drunk, a Californian and a Minnesotan, a university
professor and a shipyard worker, a mid-western farmer and a New
York City business man, a 16-year-old boy and a 60-year-old woman, a
Frenchman and an American.
Deterioration of the consumption level is rarely proportional to its
quantitative decline. Raising the consumption level by no means insures
significant improvement in it. In our American life, there is wide scope
for improving the consumption level without raising it and while reducing
some elements in it. Overeating and other excesses in consumption
frequently entail not only waste but positive injury, and some curtailment
may be essential to improvement of the consumption balance.
Losses of vitamins and minerals in food preparation can be minimized
by methods that improve palatability as well as nutritive content, and
better satisfaction of needs and wants achieved even with reduced consumption.
The ways in which enlarged purchasing power is utilized
profoundly influence the net result in terms of living.
For such reasons, measures of consumption levels afford no reliable
indexes to planes of living. Broadly speaking, consumption comprehends
what is used, while living is more concerned with the net outcome in
relation to deep-seated cravings, basic needs, and other wants.
Acquisition for consumption by purchase, another concept in common
use, is by no means identical with actual consumption. Important
progress has been made in analyzing and forecasting consumption expenditures,
and from these, adjusted for changes in prices, are derived
valuable indexes of what is sometimes miscalled "real consumption"
or the "standard of living." Publicity has recently been given to such
indexes purporting to show that the British consumption level of 1943
had fallen 21 per cent below that of 1939, while the American had risen
15 per cent.2 Actually, whatever the virtues of these comparative
figures, they are not reliable indexes of the two consumption levels.
They necessarily ignore elements of consumption that do not enter into
exchange, the consumption of purchased goods already possessed, many
types of quality change, and important distributive aspects hidden
behind aggregates and averages.
In the simpler days of the past, self-service, mutual service, and


#### Split:
2 "Real Consumption in U. S. Gains during War as Standard of Living Falls in Britain,"
Anti-Inflation Bulletin (Life Insurance Companies of America, New York), Dec. 20,
1944.