HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
5
denounced. The contemplation of the facts led to penetrating insights.
Dr. R. A. MacKay in a tribute in the Ottawa Citizen put it this way:
Of a reflective, imaginative, and almost intuitive cast of mind, he had a
singular capacity for seeing significant relationships between the material
environment and ideas, and between facts themselves, which often escaped
the more pedestrian scholar. . . . At times his original mind leaped great
chasms to conclusions which more timid or less imaginative minds could
not follow.
Great and distinguished as was his contribution to scholarship
through his own writing, perhaps even greater was his contribution
through the development, stimulus, encouragement, support, and on
occasion chastening, of his students, his colleagues in the University
of Toronto, and his fellow workers in Canada and the United States,
fellow workers not just in economic history but in all the social sciences
and in the humanities too. George Ferguson writing in the Montreal
Star did not exaggerate when he spoke of the "enormous influence" he
exercized and when he went on to say:
The man had power he did not know he had. The social scientists of
Canada and many men besides-were largely Innis men. Scarcely one of
them but had not come under his purging, beneficent authority. He drove
their minds relentlessly into new and deeper categories of thought. He
praised them and scourged them for their own good, and only the incom-
petents and the blind resented what he did.
He had early realized the importance of communication among the
social scientists of Canada, of ending the feuds and competition of the
past and of beginning a period of friendly cooperation. One thing.
needed was a Journal. In 1928 he persuaded the University of Toronto
to begin to publish at irregular intervals Contributions to Canadian
Economics. He played an important part in the revival in 1929 of the
Canadian Political Science Association and a crucial part in 1934 in
the founding of the Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
Science, to replace Contributions and the Proceedings of the Associa-
tion, and to extend the possibility of publication. The Canadian Social
Science Research Council was largely his creation: he was a member
of its executive board in its formative years and its chairman from 1945
to 1948. His part in the establishment of a parallel council for the
humanities was important and crucial. In all these organizations he
strove to ensure that they would give support to the individual scholar
following his own line, and not distort the free growth of scholarship
by bribing men to conform to the plans of others.
On three occasions Harold Innis accepted appointments as Royal
Commissioner: the Nova Scotia Royal Commission of Economic In-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
