BURNS: ECONOMIC STABILITY
19
We are living in extraordinarily creative but also deeply troubled
times. One of the triumphs of this generation is the progress that our
nation has made in reducing economic instability. In the years ahead,
no matter what we do as a people, our economy will continue to undergo
changes, many of which were neither planned nor anticipated. How-
ever, the course of events, both domestic and international, will also de-
pend and to a large degree-on our resourcefulness and courage in
deliberately modifying the structure of our economy so as to strengthen
the forces of growth and yet restrain instability.
Great opportunities as well as difficult problems face our nation.
Monopoly power, which is still being freely exercised despite all the
exhortation of recent years, can be curbed by moving toward price and
wage controls or, as many economists still hope, by regenerating com-
petition. Higher protective tariffs, import quotas, and "Buy American"
schemes can be embraced or, as many economists hope, avoided. A tax
structure that inhibits private investment and directs people's energy
into activities that contribute little to the nation's economic strength can
be retained or reformed. Costly farm surpluses can be further en-
couraged by government or discontinued. The problems posed by the
slums and the inefficient transportation of many of our cities can be
neglected or attacked with some zeal. The inadequacy of our unemploy-
ment insurance system can be ignored until the next recession or cor-
rected while there is opportunity for a judicious overhauling. In general,
our governmental authorities can deal with recessions by trusting to
improvisations of public spending, which often will not become effective
until economic recovery is already under way, or by providing in ad-
vance of any recession for fairly prompt and automatic adjustment of
income tax rates to a temporarily lower level of economic activity. The
coordination of governmental policies, which may make the difference
between success and failure in promoting our national objectives, can be
left largely to accidents of personal force and ingenuity or it can be made
systematic through an economic policy board under the chairmanship of
the President. These and other choices will have to be made by the
people of the United States; and economists-far more than any other
group will in the end help to make them.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:17:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
