HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
23
tion. When I discovered that the notes which he left did not mention the
subject which we had discussed I thought that I should offer to present some
idea of what he had intended to say. I cannot, of course, present his idea as
he would have presented it. I do not know what illustrations and stories he
would have used nor can I imagine how his idea would have developed in
the course of time. I shall try to present his idea with as few of my own
thoughts as possible.
As the subject of his address he wanted to consider the idea that America's
strongest tradition is that she has no tradition. America means the United
States, but in most cases these remarks apply also to Canada. During our talks
we often discussed my trip to Europe in the spring. I had been greatly im-
pressed in Europe-especially in France where I spent most of my time-
by the intense and active cultural life of the people. Plays, operas, symphonies,
paintings, books and even movies seemed to be active media of communica-
tion in France. People seemed to think in terms of these arts and they seemed
to regard state-supported theatres, opera houses and radio networks as normal
and useful parts of their society. I asked my father why people in North
America don't take much interest in these activities since they aspire to
have a high level of culture. He said that Americans thought of these things
as being connected with the old world and that Americans have been so
anxious to be independent that they have given up a great many means of
cultural expression. The American tradition involves a studied lack of interest
in the culture of Europe. Actually, my father said, this lack of interest in the
European traditions is in itself a tradition; and a tradition which consists of
keeping oneself to oneself in both space and time is more stultifying than the
traditions which Americans are trying to avoid.
Americans do not like to have any links with the past. They want to be
free to question any part of their culture at any time. They do not like to
have a large body of accepted opinion however sensible it may be. Americans
do not want to admit that there is anything in the past which is better than
anything in the present. They refuse to learn anything from the older Euro-
pean countries as these countries represent to Americans "the sort of thing we
want to get away from." Americans want to develop a new way of life on
a new continent.
The results of this desire for freedom from the past are in some ways
unfortunate. My father regarded the media of communication of modern
America as a sort of trap from which he could see no escape. In the field of
education, for instance, a student who comes to a university is not presented
with a body of knowledge which is considered to be fundamental to our
society; he is encouraged to take a series of survey courses. The American
tradition maintains that people should not be pushed around but Americans
are so afraid of this that even the dissemination of ideas and facts is looked
upon as a sort of pressure which the student must resist and from which the
professor must refrain. It is only in specialized fields that professors can act
as authorities. For the body of culture which is common to all citizens there
are no authorities and all opinions are of equal value. No matter how carefully
and objectively a study of society may be done, anyone is free to dismiss it
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
