quite gratifying minority, make economics their major field of study
and quite a few (although, perhaps, not enough to supply the to-beanticipated
demand for teachers of economics) go on with graduate
work. But how much economics is learned “for keeps" from college
courses is uncertain. Still more doubtful is whether college study of
economics stimulates an abiding interest in the subject and gives the
students the ability to think through economic problems.
As a former government official concerned with the settlement of
labor disputes and since then as a privately selected labor arbitrator, I
have been impressed by the fact that arguments based on economic
principles are but seldom advanced by either party. Terms like “marginal
utility,” “labor mobility,” “propensity to consume" and the like
just do not occur in the presentation of actual labor cases. Yet the individuals
presenting the arguments and some of the principals are often
former students of economics-not uncommonly of not many years ago.
Similar failure to indicate that anything learned in courses in economics
has "stuck" is all too evident in debates in legislative halls and
on the political hustings, many of the participants in which, again, are
former college students of economics. Some “eggheads” in public life
have made fairly extensive use of economic principles, but have had
little appeal to the public. Far more effective has been a repetition of
platitudes about the economy, most of which have their origin with the
public relations propagandists of business and other economic groups.
Economists frankly serving business, as increasing numbers are doing,
apparently have been more successful in commanding an audience. But
much of what many business economists, and the smaller number of
labor economists, are saying cannot be regarded as original, amounting
to little more than giving an aura of scholarship to what is essentially
propaganda. By and large, business economics has been more influential
than general economics. Business economists have become important
advisers to great businesses, and some, as well as a few general economists,
serve with distinction on boards of directors, and occasionally an
economist becomes a business manager. Their influence on public affairs,
however, also is quite limited.
II
Believing as I do that the original concept of economics, expressed in
the old term "political economy” was sound, I inquire why economists
have so little influence in public affairs. Among these reasons, I believe
is the more recent attitude of looking upon government as belonging
within the domain of the political scientist, and only on the periphery
of economics.
This seems to me to greatly understate the importance of government.