to shifts in schedules that would raise labor's wages tremendously, in
a way more consistent with the 1848 Communist Manifesto's paeans
of praise for the capitalistic system than with his elaborated
writings.⁹
In brief, technical change was gold in giving Marx cyclical insights,
and dirt in giving him secular insights or an understanding of evolving
equilibrium states. I should warn you that this is my opinion. and that
I have always been surprised that I should be a virtual monopolist
with respect to this vital analysis.
So far I have been talking about Marx as an economist. And I have
been doing my best, subject to truth, to find some merit in him. (You
may recall Emerson's neighbor in Concord: when he died the minister
tried to find something to say at the funeral eulogy and ended up with,
"Well, he was good at laying fires.") Even this represents a resurrec-
tion of Marx's reputation. Keynes, for example, was much more typi-
cal of our professional attitudes toward Marxism when he dismissed
it all as "turbid" nonsense. (In view of the tendency of the radical
right for whom all Chinese look alike-to equate Keynesianism with
Marxism, this ironical fact is worth nothing; and also its converse,
since there is nothing communists deplore more than the notion that
capitalism can be kept breathing healthily by the Keynesian palliatives
of fiscal and monetary policy.)
Technical economics has little to do with Karl Marx's important
role in the history of human thought. It is true that he and his fol-
lowers felt that their brand of socialism differed from the sentimental
brands of the past in that Marxist socialism was scientifically based
and, therefore, had about it an inevitability and a special correctness.
I need not labor the point before this group that the "science" involved
was not that body of information about commercial and productive
activity and those methods of analyzing the behavior relations which
we would call economics. Political economy in our sense of the word
was the mere cap of Karl Marx's iceberg. Marx's bold economic or
materialistic theory of history, his political theories of the class strug-
gle, his transmutations of Hegelian philosophy have an importance for
the historian of “ideas" that far transcends his façade of economics.
Finally, one must never make the fatal mistake in the history of
ideas of requiring of a notion that it be "true." For that discipline,
the slogan must be, "The customer is always right." Its objects are
what men have believed; and if truth has been left out, so much the
If migration from the country kept wages down to a city minimum, then the average


#### Split:
wage and living standard of country-cum-city would be raised in accordance with the
optimization desired by a technocrat-unless, again, Malthusianism is admitted back into
the rural hovel.