was a shift in emphasis toward fiscal controls. I still believe that
the first phase of this shift, which we called pump-priming, and which
involved a combination of monetary control and a cyclically unbalanced
budget, represented, if we could have held to it, the most promising
approach. But this seems to me to have been a case, par excellence,
of theory's being carried along by its own internal momentum to the
point where fiscal policy threatened to submerge monetary policy,
without having proved its own effectiveness. Deficits, instead of being
merely cyclical, became continuous; monetary policy became burdened
with the dual and conflicting rôles of stabilizing the debt as well as
stabilizing the economy, and the emphasis on the former rôle increasingly
overshadowed the latter. This was the kind of problem that I
felt some economists overlooked when they belittled the significance
of an internal debt on the ground that "we owe it to ourselves."14
We can only speculate as to what the further developments might
have been but for the war. My own view was that we had had one of
the longest and greatest recoveries on record from the Great Depression,
and that, though we had let it get out of hand in 1936-37 on a
still low level of employment, the new recovery from the steep but
short depression of 1937-38 might well have carried us to a more normal
level of output and employment, and have provided the setting for a
more effective coordination of monetary and fiscal policies.
But the war greatly changed the dimensions and even the character
of the problem. By attempting to freeze the pattern of interest rates and
by allowing automatic access by banks to central bank reserves, we
found that it is not possible to freeze interest rates except in one direction,
and that longer term rates fall toward the shortest and the debt
is freely monetized, as bankers and others "play the pattern." Since
the war, the great problem has been how to restore some effective degree
of freedom to the monetary authority to perform its rôle as an
economic stabilizer, with due regard also for maintaining a properly
functioning government securities market. This is the problem of monetary
policy and debt management. I shall not attempt to discuss it
here it is being dealt with in two of our sessions 15-except to say that
after slow progress earlier we may now be witnessing something like a
monetary renaissance, with the Treasury-Federal Reserve accord of
March 1951 unpegging the long-term rate, and with a demonstration of




#### Split:

See J. H. Williams, "The Implications of Fiscal Policy for Monetary Policy and the
Banking System," Proceedings of the American Economic Association, Am. Econ. Rev.,
Vol. XXXII, No. 1, Pt. 2 (March, 1942), pp. 234-49.
15 See Woodlief Thomas, "Recent Experience with Monetary-Fiscal Measures," and
R. V. Rosa, "Integrating Debt Management and Open Market Operations," which will be
published in the Proceedings of the American Economic Association, Vol. XLII, May,
1952.
