they are rather like the contents of Pandora's box, full of difficulties
and hope.

Human resources obviously have both quantitative and qualitative
dimensions. The number of people, the proportion who enter upon useful
work, and hours worked are essentially quantitative characteristics.
To make my task tolerably manageable, I shall neglect these and consider
only such quality components as skill, knowledge, and similar
attributes that affect particular human capabilities to do productive
work. In so far as expenditures to enhance such capabilities also increase
the value productivity of human effort (labor), they will yield
a positive rate of return.*

How can we estimate the magnitude of human investment? The
practice followed in connection with physical capital goods is to estimate
the magnitude of capital formation by expenditures made to produce
the capital goods. This practice would suffice also for the formation
of human capital. However, for human capital there is an additional
problem that is less pressing for physical capital goods: how to distinguish
between expenditures for consumption and for investment. This
distinction bristles with both conceptual and practical difficulties. We
can think of three classes of expenditures: expenditures that satisfy
consumer preferences and in no way enhance the capabilities under
discussion-these represent pure consumption; expenditures that enhance
capabilities and do not satisfy any preferences underlying consumption
these represent pure investment; and expenditures that
have both effects. Most relevant activities clearly are in the third class,
partly consumption and partly investment, which is why the task of
identifying each component is so formidable and why the measurement
of capital formation by expenditures is less useful for human investment
than for investment in physical goods. In principle there is an
alternative method for estimating human investment, namely by its
yield rather than by its cost. While any capability produced by human
investment becomes a part of the human agent and hence cannot be
sold; it is nevertheless "in touch with the market place" by affecting
the wages and salaries the human agent can earn. The resulting increase
in earnings is the yield on the investment.5

Despite the difficulty of exact measurement at this stage of our
understanding of human investment, many insights can be gained by
examining some of the more important activities that improve human
4

* Even so, our observed return can be either negative, zero or positive because our
observations are drawn from a world where there is uncertainty and imperfect knowledge
and where there are windfall gains and losses and mistakes aplenty.
5 In principle, the value of the investment can be determined by discounting the additional
future earnings it yields just as the value of a physical capital good can be determined
by discounting its income stream.
