tic industry are raised, with a resulting increase in the demand for the
products of the firm. Why should the clashes and compromises of di-
vergent opinions reverse the direction of the change that would be
"dictated" by the simple rule of profit maximization? Perhaps one vice
president wants to raise prices without increasing output, while an-
other wants to increase output without (at least at the moment) rais-
ing prices. No matter what their compromise will be, it is likely to con-
form with what the simple rule suggests. But if not, so what? Remem-
ber we are talking about industries with more than a few firms and
with free entry."
Other Qualifications to Competitive Price Theory
Substitution between income and leisure looks like the strongest
reason for a qualification in cases in which the change in conditions is
such that not only the locus of maximum profits is shifted but also the
amount of profit obtainable is changed. Take again the example of a
tariff increase shutting out foreign competition. The firms in the indus-
try will find that given outputs will now fetch higher prices and that in-
creased outputs can be sold at prices higher than those prevailing be-
fore tariffs were raised. And profits will be higher in any case, so that
managers even owner-managers-will be inclined to relax their
efforts. Yet would anybody seriously argue that the substitution of lei-
sure (coffee breaks, cocktail parties, golf) for potential profits would
be such that total output would be reduced instead of increased? It is
not a likely story, and where the industry consists of several or many
firms, the small probability vanishes quickly. What remains of the ar-
gument is that total output would increase, in reaction to the tariff in-
crease, somewhat less than it would if the managers were eager beav-
ers and did not relax in their efforts when profits increased. Thus, the
elasticity of supply of the products in question is a little smaller. But
since we do not know how much it would be anyhow, the unknown
substraction from an unknown number should not cause the economic
theorist any serious anxieties. (And if the politicians who push for the
tariff increase decide to push less hard if we tell them that their friends
in the industry will enjoy some of the added protection in the form of
more leisure and recreation, we would not really mind.)
Even if formal accuracy demanded that we accept the maximization
of the decision-maker's total utility as the basic assumption, simplicity
and fruitfulness speak for sticking with the postulate of maximiza-
tion of money profits for situations in which competition is effective.
The question is not whether the firms of the real world will really max-
"A great champion of more realistic theories of the firm summed up his reflections on
their implications for general economics with this statement: "We shall not be far wrong
in concluding ... that the impact of more realistic theories of the firm on static price
analysis is likely to be small" [6, p. 42].