recession of 1945 consumer spending actually kept increasing. In each
of the later recessions it fell somewhat; but the decline at no time exceeded
one per cent and lasted only a quarter or two. In the second
place, instead of lagging at the recovery stage of the business cycle, as
it had in earlier times, consumer spending turned upward before production
or employment resumed its expansion. This shift in cyclical
behavior appears clearly in department store sales, which have been
recorded on a substantially uniform basis for several decades and are
widely accepted as a tolerably good indicator of consumer spending. In
the recoveries of 1921, 1924, 1927, and 1938, these sales lagged by
intervals ranging from two to four months. In 1933 their upturn came
at the same time as in production and employment. It thus appears that,
during the 1920's and 1930's, consumer spending in no instance led the
economy out of a slump. In the postwar period, on the other hand, department
store sales have led successive recoveries by intervals stretching
from two to five months. Of course, department store sales
cover only a small fraction of consumer expenditure, and correction for
price changes would alter their historical record somewhat. But the
main features of the cyclical behavior of dollar sales by department
stores are broadly confirmed by other evidence on consumer spending,
which is extensive for recent years. We may therefore conclude with
considerable assurance that consumer spending has played a more dynamic
role in recent times. Not only have consumers managed their
spending during recessions so that the cumulative process of deflation.
has been curbed, but consumer spending has emerged as one of the
active factors in arresting recession and hastening recovery.
This new role of the consumer in the business cycle reflects some of
the developments of the postwar period that we considered earlier,
particularly the greatly enhanced stability in the flow of personal income,
the steady expansion in the number of income recipients, and the
relative increase in the number of steady jobs. It reflects also the improvements
of financial organization and other structural changes
which have strengthened the confidence of people, whether acting as
consumers or investors, in their own and the nation's economic future.
Whatever may have been true of the past, it can no longer be held that
consumers are passive creatures who lack the power or the habit of
initiating changes in economic activities. There is no harm in thinking
of consumer spending as being largely "determined" by past and current
incomes, provided we also recognize that the level of current incomes
is itself shaped to a significant degree by the willingness of
people to work hard to earn what they need to live as they feel they
should. The evidence of rising expectations and increased initiative on
the part of consumers is all around us. It appears directly in the rapidly