nopolies. They were shallow reasons, but what is instructive is that all
of them “can be, in great measure, obviated by the recently developed
invention of 'Commissioners,' that is to say, bodies of men appointed
by governmental authorities for the express purpose of industrial operation
or control." Hence the government is now capable of “beneficial
intervention in industries, under conditions which would not have
justified such intervention in earlier times" [8, p. 250].
If time were not the most precious thing that one professor can give
to another, I would follow in detail Pigou's travels from this inauspicious
beginning. We would be instructed by the evidence which he found
sufficient to a series of propositions on the state's competence:
laws directly aimed at "maintaining competition" are practically certain
to fail of their purpose [8, p. 253].

. . . in respect of industries, where the quality of the output is of supreme
importance and would, in private hands, be in danger of neglect, public
operation is desirable [8, p. 288].

. . . the relative inefficiency of public operation, as compared with private
operation, is very large in highly speculative undertakings, and dwindles
to nothing in respect of those where the speculative element is practically
non-existent.17

The evidence, you will hardly need be reminded, consisted of a few
quotations from books on municipal trading.

Pigou's views of the competence of the state were, like his predecessors'
views, a tolerably random selection of the immediately previous
views, warmed by hope. He felt that reliance upon such loose general
reflections was unavoidable. On the question of whether public or
private operation of an industry would be more efficient in production,
we are told "at the outset, it must be made clear that attempts to conduct
such a comparison by reference to statistics are fore-doomed to
failure" [8, p. 274]. How is it made clear? Very simply: by pointing
out that it is unlikely that a public and a private enterprise operate
under identical conditions of production. This test of the feasibility of
statistical research would rule out all such research, and of course
Pigou throughout his life accepted this implication.
Let me say that Pigou did not differ from his less illustrious colleagues
in the superficiality of his judgments on the economic competence
of the state-here he was at least as shrewd and circumspect as
they. He differed only in writing more pages of economic analysis of
fully professional quality than any other economist of the twentieth
century.

Rather than sample other economists, I shall characterize more gen-
17 The maturing fruit in a later edition; The Economics of Welfare (4th ed., 1932),




#### Split:

p. 399.
