the battlefield. This, incidentally, does not mean that either of us has
succeeded in converting the other to the "true faith.”
What was the outcome of the controversy? Who won? We could not
possibly say if we have not first agreed on precisely what the shooting
was about. I have heard it said that Machlup won the battle but Lester
won the war. What this means, however, cannot be known unless we
know what the issues and objectives of the war had been. Was it merely
to make economics safe for or from marginalism? Were there not
several other issues being fought over?

Some of the Major Issues

There were no doubt a good many contentions of all sorts-major,
minor, essential, incidental, interpretative, factual, methodological,
substantive, and all the rest. To present a complete catalogue of the
issues involved would be too ambitious a task for this occasion, but a
partial listing might be helpful.

The chief issue, of course, was whether marginal analysis was invalid
and ought to be discarded, especially as far as the theory of prices,
cost, wages, and employment in manufacturing industry is concerned.
This issue, however, implied the question of the correct interpretation
of marginal analysis, including the tenets of the marginal-productivity
principle. In this connection, differences in the models of the firm customarily
used in different kinds of analysis became relevant. Involved
here was the question of whether the postulate of maximizing money
profits led to conclusions very different from those derivable from assumptions
of conduct guided by a variety of largely nonpecuniary considerations.


Underlying all these questions were some issues of general scientific
methodology: the legitimacy and usefulness of abstract theorizing on
the basis of unrealistic assumptions, or perhaps on the basis of assumptions
regarded as “reasonable” thought not “universally true."
These issues, in particular, were whether an assumption of profit maximization
as the effective objective of the firm in the theoretical model
may be accepted as a tenable hypothesis only if it can be verified that
all or a majority of those who actually run business firms in the real
world agree that this is their only or major objective, that they are capable
of obtaining all the information and of performing all the calculations
needed for the realization of that objective, and are really carrying
out the actions found to be optimal in this fashion; or, alternatively,
whether all these tests may be dispensed with and the assumption
of profit maximization nevertheless accepted as a fruitful postulate
from which conclusions can be derived which correspond with what
can be observed in the records of prices and quantities.