14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
sphere. Since the early 1920's, when the Federal Reserve authorities
first learned how to influence credit conditions through open-market
operations, long-term interest rates have tended to move down as soon
as the cyclical peak of economic activity was reached, in contrast to
the long lags that were characteristic of earlier times. Since 1948 the
decline of long-term interest rates in the early stages of a recession has
also become more rapid. This change in the cyclical behavior of capital
markets reflects the increased vigor and effectiveness of recent mone-
tary policies. Inasmuch as optimism, as a rule, is still widespread during
the initial stages of an economic decline, a substantial easing of credit,
provided it comes early enough, can appreciably hasten economic re-
covery. This influence is exerted only in part through lower interest
rates. Of greater consequence is the fact that credit becomes more
readily available, that the money supply is increased or kept from fall-
ing, that the liquidity of financial assets is improved, and that financial
markets are generally stimulated. The effects of easier credit are apt
to be felt most promptly by smaller businesses and the home-building
industry, but they tend to work their way through the entire economy.
There can be little doubt that the rather prompt easing of credit con-
ditions, which occurred during recent setbacks of production, was of
some significance in keeping their duration so short.
Business firms have also been paying closer attention to the business
cycle, and not a few of them have even tried to do something about it.
These efforts have been expressed in a variety of ways-through the
adoption of long-range capital budgets, closer control of inventories,
and more energetic selling or some relaxation of credit standards in
times of recession. I do not know enough to assess either the extent or
the success of some of these business policies. Surely, business invest-
ment in fixed capital has remained a highly volatile activity-a fact
that is sometimes overlooked by concentrating attention on years in-
stead of months and on actual expenditures instead of new commit-
ments. There is, however, strong evidence that the businessmen of our
generation manage inventories better than did their predecessors. The
inventory-sales ratio of manufacturing firms has lately averaged about
a fourth less than during the 1920's, despite the increased importance
of the durable goods sector where inventories are especially heavy. The
trend of the inventory-sales ratio has also moved down substantially in
the case of distributive firms. This success in economizing on inventories
has tended to reduce the fluctuations of inventory investment relative
to the scale of business operations and this in turn has helped to mod-
erate the cyclical swings in production. Not only that, but it appears
that the cyclical downturns of both inventories and inventory invest-
ment have tended to come at an earlier stage of the business cycle in
