BURNS: ECONOMIC STABILITY
9
once business investment began declining appreciably, a reduction of
consumer spending soon followed. Sometimes the expansion of invest-
ment culminated because the firms of one or more key industries, finding
that their markets were growing less rapidly than had been anticipated,
made an effort to bring their productive capacity or inventories into
better adjustment with sales. Sometimes the expansion culminated be-
cause the belief grew that construction and financing costs had been
pushed to unduly high levels by the advance of prosperity. Sometimes
it culminated for all these or still other reasons. But whatever the cause
or causes of the decline in investment, it made its influence felt over
an increasing area of the economy. For a while consumer spending
was maintained at a peak level or even kept rising. But since business-
men were now buying on a smaller scale from one another, more and
more workers lost their jobs or their overtime pay, financial embarrass-
ments and business failures became more frequent, and uncertainty
about the business outlook spread to parts of the economy in which
sales and profits were still flourishing. If some consumers reacted to
these developments by curtailing their spending in the interest of
caution, others did so as a matter of necessity. Before long, these cur-
tailments proved sufficient to bring on some decline in the aggregate
spending of consumers. The impulses for reducing business investments
therefore quickened and the entire round of events was repeated, with
both investment and consumption declining in a cumulative process.
As the contraction continued, it tried men's patience, yet in time
worked its own cure. Driven by hard necessity, business firms moved
with energy to reduce costs and increase efficiency. Consumers whose
incomes were declining often saved less or dissaved in order not to
disrupt their customary living standards. Hence, even if sales and prices
were still falling, profit margins improved here and there. In the mean-
time, bank credit became more readily available, costs of building and
terms of borrowing became more favorable, the bond market revived,
business failures diminished, and the investment plans of innovators
and others began expanding again. When recovery finally came, it was
likely to be led by a reduced rate of disinvestment in inventories or by
a new rush to make investments in fixed capital. At this stage of the busi-
ness cycle, consumer spending was at its very lowest level, if not still
declining.
Many of these features of earlier business cycles have carried over
to the present. However, the behavior of consumers in the postwar
recessions has departed from the traditional pattern in two respects. In
the first place, consumers maintained their spending at a high level even
after business activity had been declining for some months, so that the
tendency of recessions to cumulate was severely checked. During the
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:17:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
