SCHUMPETER: SCIENCE AND IDEOLOGY
353
itself only to his indicatives, not to his imperatives. This being under-
stood, the first question that arises is what kind of ideology we are
to attribute to him. Proceeding on the Marxist principle we shall look
to his social location, that is, to his personal and ancestral class
affiliations and in addition to the class connotation of the influences
that may have formed or may have helped to form what we have
called his vision. He was a homo academicus who became a civil
servant. His people were more or less of a similar type: his family, not
penniless but neither wealthy, kept up some standard of education
and fell in with a well-known group in the Scotland of his day. Above
all it did not belong to the business class. His general outlook on
things social and economic reproduced these data to perfection. He
beheld the economic process of his time with a cold critical eye and
instinctively looked for mechanical rather than personal factors of
explanation such as division of labor. His attitude to the land-owning
and to the capitalist classes was the attitude of the observer from outside
and he made it pretty clear that he considered the landlord (the "sloth-
ful" landlord who reaps where he has not sown) as an unnecessary,
and the capitalist (who hires "industrious people" and provides them
with subsistence, raw materials, and tools) as a necessary evil. The
latter necessity was rooted in the virtue of parsimony, eulogy of which
evidently came from the bottom of his Scottish soul. Apart from this,
his sympathies went wholly to the laborer who "clothes everybody
and himself goes in rags." Add to this the disgust he felt-like all
the people in his group-at the inefficiency of the English bureaucracy
and at the corruption of the politicians and you have practically all
of his ideological vision. While I cannot stay to show how much this
explains of the picture he drew, I must emphasize that the other
component of this vision, the natural-law philosophy that he imbibed
in his formative years, the product of similarly conditioned men, in-
fluenced the ideological background from which he wrote in a similar
manner natural freedom of action, the workman's natural right to
the whole product of industry, individualistic rationalism and so on,
all this was taught to him ere his critical faculties were developed
but there was hardly need to teach him these things for they came
"naturally" to him in the air he breathed. But-and this is the really
interesting point-all this ideology, however strongly held, really
did not much harm to his scientific achievement. Unless we go to him
for economic sociology, 5 we receive from him sound factual and analytic
teaching that no doubt carries date but is not open to objection on the
score of ideological bias. There is some semiphilosophical foliage of
5
' Even there, so I have been reminded by Professor E. Hamilton, there is perhaps more
to praise than there is to blame.
