special kind of perfection and up-to-dateness that would be needed in
our tax laws.
One reason why such perfection and up-to-dateness are unlikely ever
to be realized deserves special mention here. This reason involves an
aspect of the profit system that by its very nature lies outside the field
of phenomena the ordinary type of economic-model analysis can han-
dle. In general any model for the profit system assumes the profit of a
firm to be defined as the algebraic sum of a list of revenue and cost
items; and throughout the analysis of such a model the list of these
revenue and cost items must necessarily be held constant. Thus im-
plicitly the analysis assumes the firm operates under some set of legal
rules and interpretations of those rules, and takes the rules and inter-
pretations as fixed. But certainly businessmen often give telling support
to proposed legislation they deem good for their business, and they are
continually seeking new favorable legal interpretations or what comes
to the same thing, new loopholes in the law-not to mention the fact
that getting some special discriminatory favorable consideration from
a public official has all too frequently been regarded as a profitable
expedient. One thing the pursuit of profit means is seeking favorable
changes in the way profit is defined and determined.
II
So much for the policy implications of the role of the profit system
in organizing economic activity. In considering policy implications of
the role of competition we need to note another central-management
function, that of regulating the prices and other terms on which trad-
ing takes place. This function is of course auxiliary to the four we have
so far been largely concerned with, for they will only be performed as
they should be if the economy's scheme of pecuniary rewards and in-
centives is appropriate to induce such performance, and we will only
have a scheme of pecuniary rewards and incentives that is appropriate
in all its details if the regulatory function is properly performed, i.e.,
if the prices and the other trading terms are just right. So far as we
rely on the impersonal operation of institutions for performing this
auxiliary regulatory function we rely primarily on the institution of
competition.
Under the hypothetical conditions of a perfect competitive market
the operation of the regulatory function is quite simple. Buyer compe-
tition pushes prices up, seller competition pushes them down to a uni-
form level that leaves no potential buyer or seller who is willing to trade
at that level unsatisfied. However an actual market adjustment that
approximates this kind of perfection will not necessarily be one that
conforms to sound public policy. The price may represent a cut-throat