size and region [21]. Because these differentials in earnings correspond
closely to corresponding differentials in education, they strongly sug-
gest that the one is a consequence of the other. Negroes who operate
farms, whether as tenants or as owners, earn much less than whites on
comparable farms.² Fortunately, crops and livestock are not vulnerable
to the blight of discrimination. The large differences in earnings seem
rather to reflect mainly the differences in health and education. Workers
in the South on the average earn appreciably less than in the North
or West and they also have on the average less education. Most migra-
tory farm workers earn very little indeed by comparison with other
workers. Many of them have virtually no schooling, are in poor health,
are unskilled, and have little ability to do useful work. To urge that
the differences in the amount of human investment may explain these
differences in earnings seems elementary. Of more recent vintage are
observations showing younger workers at a competitive advantage; for
example, young men entering the labor force are said to have an ad-
vantage over unemployed older workers in obtaining satisfactory jobs.
Most of these young people possess twelve years of school, most of the
older workers six years or less. The observed advantage of these younger
workers may therefore result not from inflexibilities in social security or
in retirement programs, or from sociological preference of employers,
but from real differences in productivity connected with one form of hu-
man investment, i.e., education. And yet another example, the curve re-
lating income to age tends to be steeper for skilled than for unskilled
persons. Investment in on-the-job training seems a likely explanation,
as I shall note later.
Economic growth requires much internal migration of workers to ad-
just to changing job opportunities [10]. Young men and women move
more readily than older workers. Surely this makes economic sense
when one recognizes that the costs of such migration are a form of
human investment. Young people have more years ahead of them than
older workers during which they can realize on such an investment.
Hence it takes less of a wage differential to make it economically ad-
vantageous for them to move, or, to put it differently, young people can
expect a higher return on their investment in migration than older
people. This differential may explain selective migration without requir-
ing an appeal to sociological differences between young and old people.
The examples so far given are for investment in human beings that
yield a return over a long period. This is true equally of investment in
education, training, and migration of young people. Not all investments
in human beings are of this kind; some are more nearly akin to current
inputs as for example expenditures on food and shelter in some coun-


#### Split:
Based on unpublished preliminary results obtained by Joseph Willett in his Ph.D.
research at the University of Chicago.