but I shall exercise great forbearance and confine myself to a selection.
Everyone may join in the game and fill in what I leave out. I shall first
state the context, then delimit the concept, and finally add a few words
of explanation.
1. In the theory of competitive prices and allocation, the firm is an
imaginary reactor to environmental changes. By "imaginary" I mean
to stress that this a pure construct for which there need not exist an
empirical counterpart. By “reactor" I mean to deny that this robot or
puppet can ever have a will of his own: he is the theorist's creature,
programmed to respond in the predetermined way.
2. In the theory of innovation and growth, the firm is an imaginary
or a typical reactor or initiator. Depending on which theory one has in
mind, we see that several combinations are possible. In the theory of
"entrepreneurial innovation" by men of very special qualities [34, pp.
78-94] the entrepreneur is neither imaginary nor a mere reactor; he
is a typical initiator. By “typical” I do not refer to the ideal type of
German sociology [47, p. 44] [35, pp. 20-63, 81] [25, pp. 21-57],
but rather to the common-sense kind of person that many of us have
met in person or, at least, have heard about. On the other hand, there
are also theories of "induced invention"-assuming latent inventiveness
(though an invention can never be a mere reaction)—and theories
of "induced growth," employing the construct of the imaginary reactor.

3. In welfare economics, the firm is an imaginary or a typical reactor
or initiator with accurate knowledge of his opportunities. Depending
on the proposition in question, all combinations are again possible,
but in any case a new requirement is introduced: accurate
knowledge of the environmental conditions on the part of all reactors
and initiators. For, in contrast to the theory of price and allocation,
the welfare theorist wants to ascertain, not only in which direction
price, input, and output will move in response to a change, but also
whether this move will increase or reduce welfare. For such an exercise
it is no longer irrelevant whether the subjective information of the
firms is correct or false.
4. In the theory of oligopoly and monopoly, the firm is a typical
reactor and initiator in a small (or zero) interacting group. I have explained
earlier why a theory of oligopoly with nothing but imaginary
reactors may not be widely applicable.
5. In the theory of organization (or bureaucracy), the firm is a typical
cooperative system with authoritative coordination. I have accepted
this formulation from one of the authorities [28, p. 187] and
thus may disclaim responsibility for it.
6. In management science (or the art of business management), the
firm is a functional information system and decision-making system