faire, except by that most irresistible of all the weapons of scholarship,
infinite repetition. Yet they could have done so, and in two directions.
Where Smith finds the competitive market incapable of performing
a task, they might have corrected him, for he was sometimes wrong. To
a degree this was done: Smith's belief that the market set too low a
value on investment in agriculture, and too high a value on foreign investment,
was properly criticized by McCulloch [6, pp. 144 ff.], and
the aberration on usury was of course promptly challenged by Bentham.
But for each of Smith's errors that was corrected, several new
ones were introduced. J. S. Mill, for example, gravely argued that the
competitive market was incapable of providing a reduction in the hours.
of work even if all the workers wished it—a mistake I am not inclined
to excuse simply because so many later economists repeated it.
What I consider to be a more important weakness in Smith's position,
however his undocumented assumption that the state was efficient
in achieving mistaken ends²-was not only accepted, but emphatically
reaffirmed by his followers. James Mill's identification of the
evils of government with the undemocratic control of its instruments
was an extreme example, but an instructive and influential one. The
holder of the power of government would always use it to further his
own ends so argued Mill with an oppressive show of logical rigor. It
followed that only a democratically controlled state would seek the
good of the entire public:
The Community cannot have an interest opposite to its interest. To affirm
this would be a contradiction in terms. The Community within itself, and
with respect to itself, can have no sinister interest . . . The Community
may act wrong from mistake. To suppose that it could from design
would be to suppose that human beings can wish their own misery.³
Hence a democracy, unlike a monarchy or an aristocracy, would do no
unwise thing except in ignorance. And this exception for ignorance was
not a serious one:
There can be no doubt that the middle rank, which gives to science, to
art, and to legislation itself, their most distinguished ornaments, and is the
chief source of all that has exalted and refined human nature, is that portion
of the Community of which, if the basis of Representation were ever
so far extended, the opinion would ultimately decide. Of the people beneath
them, a vast majority would be sure to be guided by their advice
and example.4


#### Split:
*McCulloch, a somewhat underrated man, again challenged Smith here; see "Navigation
Laws," Edinburgh Review, May 1823.
3
The Article on Government (reprinted from the Supplement to the Encyclopædia
Britannica [London 1829]), p. 7.
* Ibid., p. 32.