at the rate of the decade of the 1940's but will nevertheless increase
considerably by 1975. The use of fertilizer, feed, and other rapidturnover
capital goods will increase still more. It is projected in Chart
I that the productive asset will represent no larger a share of the national
total in 1975 than 12 per cent. Involved in such a projection is
the difficult matter of what is going to happen to land prices relative
to the general price level, and along with this, the relative level of
prices of farm products, which will be discussed in the next section.
Given the foregoing shares of the nation's labor and productive assets
in 1975, what can we expect of agriculture's share of the gross national
product? In balance, it would seem that the lowering of farm price
levels now under way, except as droughts or wars intervene, plus
strengthening of efforts to shift land out of surplus lines, and particularly
to grassland farming and livestock production, plus strengthened
effort to expand domestic consumption, especially of livestock products
among lower-income families, all of this really being forced on Congress
and the administration, plus the lowering of costs, are going to
bring farm prices and receipts from marketing into better balance with
cash outlays year by year from 1956 on, with the result that the decline
in agriculture's share of GNP will begin to be checked a little
in another year or two, and this trend will strengthen a little from 1960
on. But given no war years and relatively stable business conditions,
the curve of decline will by no means flatten out. This nation will continue
to be less and less an agricultural nation. The 5.9 per cent of the
GNP in 1955 may fall as low as 3.5 per cent by 1975; but 4.0 will be
a safer projection. A major factor in the answer will be whether our
people will prefer more output of goods or more leisure as they go
forward, and whether their way of using this leisure will call for large
outlays, like travel, or for more quiet and peaceful living.
Beyond 1975

The projections thus far have been carefully centered on 1975 in
order to give them unity. Even looking ahead no farther than this,
some very large assumptions have had to be made; one not mentioned
is that there will be no revolutionary innovations such as might arise
from the use of nuclear energy. Events and developments of these several
sorts which have been assumed away may be almost all-determinative
in another twenty-five years after 1975. Nevertheless, some looking
into the farther future lends insight into the near at hand.
The actual innovation process tends to be gradual in agriculture. For
some particular crop, it may prove fast enough to double average
yields per acre in ten years. The average cotton yield per acre of 440
in 1955 is 70 per cent higher than the yields of around ten years earlier.