worse for truth, except for the curiously-undifficult task of explaining
why truth does not sell more successfully than anything else. Marx
has certainly had more customers than any other one aspiring economist.
A billion people think his ideas are important; and for the historian
of thought that fact makes them important, in the same way
that he would have to regard as diminished in importance the subject
of Christianity, were it conceivable that it had been the religion merely
of a transitory small group who once occupied the present country of
Jordan or the state of New Mexico.
Alfred Marshall. What killed Mill for economists was not the socialism
that killed it for Shaw's no-longer-New Woman. The marginalist
school of Jevons-Walras-Menger perpetrated the murder. The roster of
neoclassical economists would include the names of Böhm-Bawerk
from Austria, J. B. Clark from the United States, Pareto from Italy,
Wicksteed from England, and Wicksell from Sweden. But, for all that
I have said earlier about his overvaluation in the market for reputations,
few will doubt that Alfred Marshall of Cambridge is the prototype
as political economist for this group. Marshall may now be old hat,
but in his day he was some headpiece.
Marshall had strong social sympathies. At the same time he realized
the harms that precipitate reform may bring. He was the prophet of
moderation. If you graft Keynesian models of income determination
on his thought and update his Victorianisms, you come close to the
median member of this Association. His pupils filled, Foxwell could
say by 1888, half the chairs of political economy in the United Kingdom;
his influence permeated the other half and, methodologically
speaking, today we are all Marshallians in the same sense that we are
all higher primates.
But what has been Marshall's role in the history of ideas, the panorama
of human thought? Never has he had one-hundredth the notice
of, say, Henry George. I remember talking to the aged Frank Taussig
at a Harvard Society of Fellows dinner before the war. Taussig quoted
in despair a recent remark of John Dewey that Henry George was the
greatest economist America had ever produced. George was the whipping
boy for the economists just before my time; but within my time
as a high school student in the Middle West, you could still find
vestigial single-taxers, the old principal of my high school being one
and my civics teacher another. George was not original in attacking
incomes that come from land; as Foxwell said long ago, nationalizers
of land we have always with us. This is understandable from the
Hume-Ricardo recognition of rent as a price-determined (rather than
price-determining) surplus to a factor in inelastic supply; but, as I
have recorded elsewhere, my implicit belief that George gave a good