HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
21
rapid extension in continental land areas and in submarine cables
enormously enhanced the availability and the accuracy of information
for the purposes of trade. It fostered demands for the equalization of
accessibility. Newspapers in Chicago, especially the Chicago Tribune,
protested vigorously in the early 'sixties against the exploitation by
New York interests of the difference in time between the two cities.
Western papers were compelled to pay high rates for market reports
controlled by New York interests in the Associated Press of that day.
The regional monopoly was gradually weakened in the latter half of
the nineteenth century and came to an end finally with the formation of
the Associated Press.
By this time my bias will have begun to wear thin and in fairness I
should indicate its character in so far as my limitations permit. I have
been primarily interested in the economic history of Canada and in par-
ticular factors which explain its peculiarities, especially the successive
importance of staple raw materials to mention fur, fish, lumber, wheat,
minerals and pulp and paper. I am concerned in this presidential
address with the problems inherent in the pulp and paper industry as
related to the production of information for purposes of trade and the
efficiency of the price system. The industry occupies a peculiar posi-
tion in that it is protected by the Bill of Rights in the American Con-
stitution and by its possibilities of control over public opinion. Possible
checks through the development of legislation in raw material produc-
ing regions, for example the provinces of Canada, have been offset by
vertical integration in which large American newspapers control their
own industrial operations in Canada.
The effects of the enormous expansion in the production of raw ma-
terial following improvements in technology in the use of wood were
evident in the sharp decline in prices of newsprint in the later part of
the 19th century and in the expansion in the production of information
by newspapers. The monopoly of the Associated Press evident chiefly
in the control of morning and Republican newspapers was offset by
the development of the Hearst Press and the International News Serv-
ice and by the development of the cheap press concerned primarily with
evening papers by the Scripps, McRae, Howard interests in the United
Press. The impact on information can be suggested in one or two
illustrations. Lowering of the price of the newspaper was dependent in
part on the denominations of money used in various cities. In Chicago
and in St. Louis the mint was persuaded to distribute quantities of pen-
nies and department stores co-operated by advertising goods for odd
amounts and thus hastening the use of small denominations. In San
Francisco on the other hand Scripps papers were handicapped by
customs continued from the gold rush period which implied refusal
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
