contemporary economy, with reference to such matters as the location
of industries, the distribution of manpower, the conditioning environ-
ment of financial practice, must find the roots of change, not only in
the extraordinary circumstances of the war effort, but in significant
preëxisting tendencies; and pre-war developments, only to a lesser
degree than the pattern of the war economy, have drawn sustenance,
for good or for ill, from the character and direction of government in-
tervention. A like relevance is generally recognized in our theoretical
thinking concerning the over-all organization and functioning of the
economic order. Exploration of current advances in economic thought
cannot, with any approach to realism, be restricted to narrow technical
contributions in the traditional sphere of economic theory. There are
basic limitations upon the adequacy of economic law, either as a reliable
description of the complexities of prevailing economic processes or as
a fruitful practical guide to social policy. In thought as in action a
consideration of the reciprocal influence of freedom and control upon
the operation of the economy is indispensable to promising inquiry. At
this juncture it would obviously be folly to ignore the revealing
experience of the great depression and the world war, with their
extensive subordination of individual enterprise to collective action, or
the impact of this experience, whether deemed favorable or unfavorable
to public control, upon the character of post-war policies. Even
fundamental thinking must reflect at least the value implications of
important policy trends.
But the discussions at these meetings are more largely concerned
with direct issues of public policy, in relation to specific problems of
outstanding significance. Within the limits of a short few days, they
can traverse only a relatively small number of representative fields; but
in each instance the principal emphasis is upon governmental activity,
from the standpoint of the service or disservice of past performance
and of future threat or promise. This applies to the domestic as well
as to the international problems being explored. Actual or potential
measures of social coöperation embodied in legal requirements, in
numerous sectors of the economy and through a great variety of
expedients, provide much of the basic material for analysis and con-
stitute the major sources of controversy.
Such matters as monetary and fiscal policy, whether dealt with as
more or less self-contained segments of investigation or in relation to
the maintenance of economic stability at a high level of production and
employment, involve existing and proposed instruments and objectives
that go far beyond mere reliance upon automatic exchange mecha-
nisms or the traditional use of the spending and taxing powers of
government. Similarly, the economist's long-established convictions