COPELAND: INSTITUTIONALISM AND WELFARE ECONOMICS
15
trial; and (though we are less proud of this one) the right to discrimi-
nate arbitrarily in choosing one's friends. They include also: freedom
of one's person and freedom to move about at will; freedom of one's
property from search, seizure and the infliction of damages and (in the
case of real estate) from unauthorized entry; freedom of assembly and
association; freedom of calling and, for each household, freedom in the
management of its budget; freedom of thought and its expression (in-
cluding religious freedom); freedom from retroactive legislation. Of
course these freedoms are not absolute; they are subject to various
limitations. Thus freedom of one's person does not exclude imprison-
ment as a penalty for a crime.
Some of these items in our bill of rights are necessary to our private
enterprise system. Freedom of consumer's choice and freedom of call-
ing are essential features of the institutional framework we depend on
for organizing economic activity. Further, workers must have freedom
to move about, and in some degree freedom of their persons and free-
dom of thought to make our economic system operate as it does today.
The overlap of the legal foundations of our economic organization
and those of personal freedom consists partly of these common bill-of-
rights items. But there is another part of the overlap too. This consists
of a number of rights and freedoms for the business enterprise itself
that are included in the legal foundations of our economic system and
that are more or less precise counterparts of the items in the bill of
personal rights. Thus if our economy is to operate as it does today, a
business corporation, likewise an unincorporated enterprise, must have
the right to a fair trial and must in some sense have freedom of its
property from seizure, search and the infliction of damages and (in
the case of real estate) freedom from unauthorized entry. Also a busi-
ness enterprise must have substantial freedom from retroactive legisla-
tion and something like a counterpart of freedom of calling and house-
hold budgetary freedom-a substantial degree of freedom of contract
and freedom in making up its budget. But freedom of contract should
not mean the right to discriminate arbitrarily. Further no business
enterprise qua business enterprise needs the right to vote or to hold.
office, or freedom of its person, or freedom of its thought, so long as
owner-operators and employees in working for the enterprise have
somewhat of both. And, except for a small special class of enterprises
that need freedom to print, broadcast or exhibit, no business enterprise
as such needs freedom of expression.
There is a substantial overlap between our bill of personal rights and
liberties and our free enterprise system. Nonetheless the two are sepa-
rate and distinct. The reason for distinguishing them is that there have
been serious problems in reconciling the two. Historically such prob-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:15:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
