18
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
to bear to explain the offsets to any declines in the shares of the lower
groups, declines otherwise deducible from the trends suggested in the
numerical illustration.
III. Other Trends Related to Those in Income Inequality
One aspect of the conjectural conclusion just reached deserves em-
phasis because of its possible interrelation with other important ele-
ments in the process and theory of economic growth. The scanty em-
pirical evidence suggests that the narrowing of income inequality in
the developed countries is relatively recent and probably did not char-
acterize the earlier stages of their growth. Likewise, the various factors
that have been suggested above would explain stability and narrowing
in income inequality in the later rather than in the earlier phases of
industrialization and urbanization. Indeed, they would suggest widen-
ing inequality in these early phases of economic growth, especially in the
older countries where the emergence of the new industrial system had
shattering effects on long-established pre-industrial economic and social
institutions. This timing characteristic is particularly applicable to fac-
tors bearing upon the lower-income groups: the dislocating effects of
the agricultural and industrial revolutions, combined with the "swarm-
ing" of population incident upon a rapid decline in death rates and the
maintenance or even rise of birth rates, would be unfavorable to the
relative economic position of lower-income groups. Furthermore,
there may also have been a preponderance in the earlier periods of fac-
tors favoring maintenance or increase in the shares of top-income
groups: in so far as their position was bolstered by gains arising out of
new industries, by an unusually rapid rate of creation of new fortunes,
we would expect these forces to be relatively stronger in the early
phases of industrialization than in the later when the pace of industrial
growth slackens.
One might thus assume a long swing in the inequality characterizing
the secular income structure: widening in the early phases of economic
growth when the transition from the pre-industrial to the industrial
civilization was most rapid; becoming stabilized for a while; and then
narrowing in the later phases. This long secular swing would be most
pronounced for older countries where the dislocation effects of the
earlier phases of modern economic growth were most conspicuous; but
it might be found also in the "younger" countries like the United States,
if the period preceding marked industrialization could be compared with
the early phases of industrialization, and if the latter could be com-
pared with the subsequent phases of greater maturity.
If there is some evidence for assuming this long swing in relative
inequality in the distribution of income before direct taxes and exclud-
