The corporate structure of mercantilist society, with its village
courts, its merchant and craft guilds, and its monopolistic overseas
trading companies, had already largely dissolved under the disintegrat-
ing influence of widespread and persistent individualism. Men insisted
on their freedom to engage in enterprise unshackled by arbitrary con-
trols. The rise of the spirit of individual initiative in economic affairs—
a spirit embodied in the entrepreneur or "undertaker" as Smith called
him was, of course, a gradual process that had its beginning in the
late Middle Ages, but it had already achieved considerable maturity by
1776. Individual entrepreneurship was the characteristic institution
around which economic activity revolved, by which economic resources
were allocated and production was organized, and through which the
several factors of production received their rewards.
Lipson described this process with an eloquence rare in economic
writings and a fidelity to the facts of English industrial development
not always achieved by those who interpret broad movements in his-
tory. He showed that in industry, agriculture, and trade the "spirited
pioneers of a brave new world," as he characterized the economic lead-
ers of that era, created business opportunities that were previously
nonexistent, or quickly seized them as they appeared and thereby
aided in the creation of an industrial environment at once challenging
and rewarding to the entrepreneur. On every score Lipson found evi-
dence of the capitalist spirit as manifest in the conception and carrying
out of speculative endeavors. Great captains of industry were rela-
tively scarce, but the single entrepreneur who put his own and some-
times other people's money into business enterprises for profit was
characteristic of the era. Individual innovators, while playing a sup-
plementary role to entrepreneurs, aided them by demonstrating the
practicality of their inventions. The men whose inventions revolu-
tionized the textile industry in the eighteenth century are household
names Hargreaves with his spinning jenny in 1767, Arkwright with
his water frame in 1768, Crompton with his cotton mule in 1775,
and Watt with his steam engine in 1782. In some instances a single
individual combined the roles of entrepreneur and innovator. Ark-
wright, who was a barber and wigmaker, secured the services of a
clockmaker, a blacksmith, and a watch-toolmaker to improve an early
model of a cotton spinning machine and together with other persons
invested £12,000 between 1771 and 1774 in the erection and operation
of a cotton mill [30, pp. 294-95]. Abraham Darby, who was the first
ironmaker to use coke instead of charcoal in iron smelting, erected 7
furnaces, which by 1756 were producing 20 to 22 tons of iron a week.
The Duke of Bridgwater constructed canals to transport coal from his
colliery to markets at Manchester and Liverpool.