KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
7
I propose, after a brief reminder of what the main economic principles
are and what they mean, to consider them in the light of three ques-
tions: their value or usefulness, their limitations, and the possible
alternatives all with respect to explanation and guidance of action.
I need hardly say that all these topics raise the deepest philosophical
issues, and that only a few general and superficial observations, se-
lected rather arbitrarily or at haphazard, are possible here. But let
me note at once that Talleyrand was referring to moral principles in
connection with political action, and it is with respect to these in par-
ticular that I wish to sound an emphatic warning. The most pernicious
and abominable principle of all, though it has been stated and preached
by the highest authorities, ecclesiastical and lay (from Athanasius to
Kant) is the principle of acting on moral principles-“do right though
the world perish." That is-as will be found to be true of moral
principles generally-it is false and pernicious if it is taken to mean
anything in particular, anything beyond the best compromise, the best
combination of good and bad, and in both means and ends, where the
problem has the means-end form.
Economic principles are simply the more general implications of the
single principle of freedom, individual and social, i.e., free association,
in a certain sphere of activity. The sphere is that of economizing, i.e.,
conduct in which quantitative means are used to achieve quantitative
ends, or rather provisional ends, goods and services quantitatively
comparable as means to a general end, also quantifiable. But economics
deals only with the apportionment of means among the provisional ends
or the proportioning of these, leaving to engineering and kindred
studies the all-or-none choices among technical processes. The general
end has no good and accepted name; it may be called economic well-
being if it is recognized that both terms require definition. It is simply
the common denominator necessarily implied in comparisons between
uses of means. Acceptance of the principle of freedom makes it super-
fluous to define the end, and the less that is specified about it the better.
The provisionally-final ends, as noted, are the impersonal goods and
services desired and sought, produced and consumed, at any time and
place. However, we must not fail to include additional means or re-
sources, produced with some fraction of those in existence at a given
time; maintenance of these, including all replacements, is of course
part of the production of the flow of consumable things.
The free association in question is exchange, in markets, an instru-
mentality necessary to specialized production, and distribution of the
joint result. The meaning of economics in the traditional or orthodox
sense is the analysis of this system of cooperation in the production
and distribution of impersonal goods. "Competition" has no necessary
