12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
tion administrator expressed it, "The foundations in assisting re-
search have suffered from chronic 'projectitus.""
Sports, religion, and philanthropy have similarly succumbed to
the organizational revolution. Baseball, the great American pastime,
was formerly regarded as an outlet for the play impulses of the
American youth, a form of exercise and recreation useful in develop-
ing muscular coordination, manual dexterity, and mental agility. It
still affords an opportunity for the display of individual prowess, but
currently it has become an organized business activity in which a
handful of individuals are paid to participate and millions pay to
watch. Baseball teams are owned by groups of businessmen who
operate them as business enterprises under franchises carrying valua-
ble privileges. In the big leagues-around which many satellite
leagues operate, primarily as feeders to the larger affiliate-the free-
dom of a player to pursue his career has given way to a set of rules
governing the sale and purchase of all players-rules formulated in
response to the business needs of the organization.
The Protestant Reformation freed the seventeenth-century indi-
vidual from the supervision of an ecclesiastical hierarchy and placed
upon him the responsibility of answering for himself the awesome
question, "What must I do to be saved?" In contrast, twentieth-
century salvation has become a group enterprise. Billy Graham is not
merely a dynamic, unusually persuasive servant of God carrying
Christ's message to lost and sinful souls, but he is the central figure
in an organization created to carry on God's work through a series of
carefully planned campaigns, locally directed by groups of religious
leaders and businessmen who have been organized by an advance
team of professional promotors. In the nightly battle for the Lord,
Graham is assisted by a corps of ushers, advisers, and counsellors
skilled in the techniques of mass salvation. In the language of a caustic
commentator, Graham “operates an assembly line of faith” [14,
p. 199], geared to handle hundreds of souls in a single night.
Philanthropy has traditionally been an individual enterprise, a
matter of the heart. People actuated by the Christian spirit have
helped those who are less fortunate. Charity frequently has expressed
a personal relationship between giver and recipient. Today the United
Givers Fund or the Community Chest is the official organization for
the dispensation of the Lord's largesse. The organizations collect con-
tributions not as voluntary gifts individually and spontaneously given
but through well-organized teams with captains, lieutenants, sub-
ordinate officers, and privates organized to collect their quotas from
the groups assigned to them. The appropriate size of each contribution
may be suggested by a central agency as a fixed percentage of the
