4
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
action or of obstruction (including financial controls) move us from
the phenomena of the endlessly tossing but perpetually leveling ocean
to the phenomena of the towering icepack and the abysmal crevasse.
Confronted by the problems of such a business world, we economists
have ranged ourselves in two schools of thought. One school would
apply dynamite to the ice jam or even hope to melt the separate blocks
back to their pristine fluidity. The other would accept crystallization as
an accomplished fact decreed by Nature; they would seek by skillful
engineering and with architectural vision to shape and build those
blocks of varying sizes-into a stable and serviceable structure of
business.
It is toward the latter of these groups that my own economic studies
have led me. Economists of today and tomorrow might well abate their
interest in the phenomena of the individual economic man following
the patterns of choice and action traditionally ascribed to exchange
coöperation in a society of individual competition. They should at the
same time guard against the present tendency to transfer the reasoning
developed from consideration of the economic functioning of the natural
individual over to the individual firm. While one individual firm may
be hardly more than a personal partnership, other firms administer the
lives and labors of tens or even hundreds of thousands of workers
and comparably weighty blocks of capital; they may sway or signifi-
cantly direct the activities of state and federal governments or even
become determining factors in international affairs. On the positive side,
we need to study much more assiduously the ways in which economic
forces (even those already studied in their individualistic context) come
to expression in the actions of large corporate concerns, national trade
unions, and agricultural marketing and pressure groups, and of govern-
ment functioning through its own ever-multiplying "action agencies."
In all this, I assume that our objective as economists is to learn how
these groups can be most effectively organized for joint voluntary
action which will attain a scheme of market values that will steadily aid
the approach toward maximum human satisfactions for the total
population.³
II
I have spoken figuratively of the need of building somewhat rigid
blocks of economic interest into a sound and serviceable structure of
business. But this, like all metaphors, harbors possibilities of mis-
interpretation. Does it imply an architect or achitectural group given
"In the words of J. M. Clark (Social Control of Business, 2nd ed., p. 58): "A democracy
will naturally set for itself the standard of the good of the greatest number, or the maximum
good where each person counts as much as every other." As to the economist's norm of
"good," I shall comment later.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:54:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
