groups that, judged by their secular levels, migrate upward or down-
ward on the income scale.
Even if we had data to approximate the income structure just out-
lined, the broad question posed at the start-how income inequality
changes in the process of a country's economic growth-could be
answered only for growth under defined economic and social conditions.
And, in fact, we shall deal with this question in terms of the experience
of the now developed countries which grew under the aegis of the busi-
ness enterprise. But even with this limitation, there are no statistics
that can be used directly for the purpose of measuring the secular
income structure. Indeed, I have difficulty in visualizing how such
information could practicably be collected-a difficulty that may be
due to lack of familiarity with the studies of our colleagues in de-
mography and sociology who have concerned themselves with prob-
lems of generation or intergeneration mobility and status. But although
we now lack data directly relevant to the secular income structure,
the setting up of reasonably clear and yet difficult specifications is
not merely an exercise in perfectionism. For if these specifications do
approximate, and I trust that they do, the real core of our interest when
we talk about shares of economic classes or long-term changes in these
shares, then proper disclosure of our meaning and intentions is vitally
useful. It forces us to examine and evaluate critically the data that are
available; it prevents us from jumping to conclusions based on these
inadequate data; it reduces the loss and waste of time involved in
mechanical manipulations of the type represented by Pareto-curve-
fitting to groups of data whose meaning, in terms of income concept,
unit of observation, and proportion of the total universe covered, re-
mains distressingly vague; and most important of all, it propels us
toward a deliberate construction of testable bridges between the avail-
able data and the income structure that is the real focus of our interest.
I. Trends in Income Inequality
Forewarned of the difficulties, we turn now to the available data.
These data, even when relating to complete populations, invariably
classify units by income for a given year. From our standpoint, this is
their major limitation. Because the data often do not permit many
size-groupings, and because the difference between annual income
incidence and longer-term income status has less effect if the number of
classes is small and the limits of each class are wide, we use a few wide
classes. This does not resolve the difficulty; and there are others due to
the scantiness of data for long periods, inadequacy of the unit used―
which is, at best, a family and very often a reporting unit-errors in the