prices, the economic allocation of resources, the distribution of income,
the geographic division of labor, and economic progress, and in doing
so he laid the basis for late-nineteenth-century neoclassicism. But he
formulated these principles as one profoundly concerned with public
policy, and it is the policy implications of his principles and the
persuasive manner in which he expounded them that make The Wealth
of Nations one of the great books of all time. On public-policy issues
he spoke with the knowledge of a keen observer of contemporary
affairs, the wisdom of a profound philosopher, and the convictions of a
great moralist. He was concerned not so much with the discovery
of new truths as with the application of sound principles in determining
the proper limits of governmental activity, and it was essentially a
negative policy that he advocated. That negative policy was a reaction
both against the teachings of the mercantilists and against the
web of administrative controls in which the economic activity of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had been enmeshed. But when he
expounded his ideas the strands of this web had already been greatly
weakened by economic forces set loose by the rise of capitalism, the
accelerated pace of technological innovation, and the development of
the factory system.
I. The Classic Norm: Economic Individualism
Smith, in defending economic individualism as a means of promoting
the national welfare, conceived of the national income as the aggregate
of individual incomes. As he put it, “the annual revenue of every society
is always precisely equal to the exchangeable value of the whole
annual produce of its industry, or rather is precisely the same thing
with that exchangeable value" [26, p. 423]. The way to maximize it
is to let individuals maximize their own income in their own way. He
recognized, of course, that no individual is primarily concerned with
promoting the general welfare. Of this he said,
By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, [every
individual] intends only his own security; and by directing that industry
in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends
only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an
invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention
[26, p. 423].
Promotion of the general welfare is a proper goal of statesmen, and
they can achieve it by the abolition of all needless restrictions on economic
activity. As Smith put it,
All systems either of preference or of restraint, therefore, being thus
completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of natural liberty
establishes itself of its own accord. Every man, as long as he does not