is to remove their source. One source, corporation saving, can be
taken care of by less conservative dividend policies. It will be easier
for corporations to pay out their net earnings in dividends as they
are earned, if other measures, necessary for the stability of private
enterprise, diminish the likelihood of serious depressions. The other
source, saving out of personal incomes, can be rendered less of a drain
on consumer purchasing power by modification of the distribution of
money income. The propensity to save, which is a parameter of the
size of individual incomes, can be reduced all along the line by cutting
down the very large incomes from which the bulk of savings comes.
There is not much doubt, indeed, that we shall retain, indefinitely,
very high taxation of these incomes. We need not be overly impressed
by the cry that high taxes impair economic incentive. The trend of
wage rates will continue upward. This will be all to the good, in raising
the standard of living and providing industry with adequate markets.
With less inequality in incomes, we may hope for wider dispersion in
in the ownership of corporate securities, provided blind reactionism
does not hamstring the S.E.C. Finally, I think we can rely to some
extent on the growing aversion to conspicuous consumption, and the
change in esthetic standards which I have mentioned.
However it comes about, there is no one thing which in the long run
will do private enterprise more good than a very material change in
the distribution of the national dividend. Earlier, I advocated greater
equality as essential to the development and efficient utilization of our
human resources. I am here advocating it in the interest of private
enterprise itself. It is the only condition under which business can be
assured a full and continuous market.
Business men want private enterprise because, they say, it is the
most productive system possible. They do not know that to be actual
fact. It is an article of faith with them. The truth is that business men
want private enterprise because it is their way of life. They are not
to be blamed for such an attitude; we all have it. But we should not
overlook the lack of disinterested objectivity in the encomiums which
private business heaps upon itself. Such unstinted praise does not
reflect a wise modesty. But underneath the seeming cocksureness of
business propaganda, one discerns the evidences of a new sense of
responsibility, based partly on the fear-which I think excessive-
that private enterprise is on trial and that its survival is doubtful.
Whether there is also the breadth of vision, the farsightedness, and the
humility and docility necessary to learning what the requisites for
survival are, time will tell.
The American people want private enterprise, not on any arbitrary,
take-it-or-leave-it terms, but on the understanding that it will have