8
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
ligion, philanthropy, civil liberties, education, communication, the arts
―the organization has replaced the individual as an institution for
promoting enterprise and getting things done. At the center of this
organizational revolution is the business corporation.
Smith's well-known skepticism of the corporation as an entrepre-
neurial device for carrying on economic activity was reflected in early
American attitudes. The first American work on political economy,
published in 1820, regarded nongovernmental corporations as "prima
facie, injurious to national wealth" and as institutions that should
"be looked upon by those who have no money, with jealousy and
suspicion." "They are," said Daniel Raymond,
and ought to be considered, as artificial engines of power, contrived by the
rich, for the purpose of increasing their already too great ascendency,
and calculated to destroy that natural equality among men, which God
has ordained, and which no government has a right to lend its power in
destroying. The tendency of such institutions is to cause a more unequal
division of property, and a greater inequality among men, than would
otherwise take place... [21, p. 429].
In 1840 the governor of Massachusetts, where most of the existing
corporations were then doing business, in a message to the Great and
General Court said of them:
These societies are one of the vices of our time. They encourage speculation
and fraud, mobilize landed property, overturn matrimonial arrangements,
escape publicity in the transfer of real property, diminish the sense of
individual responsibility, create property in mortmain, prevent all penal
remedies, are lacking in moral sense, and constitute finally a grave social
peril by concentrating too much power in the hands of certain of our
citizens [22, p. 22].
Such ideas today sound quaint indeed. Today the corporation is re-
garded as the master business institution, essential to the effective
utilization and progressive development of modern technology and
responsible for the high standard of material welfare and prosperity
that, with temporary interruptions, has characterized American society
for the past half century. This change in attitude has paralleled the
remarkable growth of corporate enterprise, both in the scope and mag-
nitude of its operations and in the frequency with which it has been
utilized.
The modern corporation, it should be noted, is a man-made institu-
tion, made legally possible as the states have liberalized their in-
corporation laws in response to the demands of businessmen, or lawyers
who have spoken for them. With its perpetual existence, the almost
unlimited scope of its legitimate activities, the limited liability of its
