I neglect the question of monetary policy for what seem to me the
adequate reasons that neither the quasi-independence of monetary
authority nor the interests and ideas of special groups offer a serious
obstacle to a monetary policy oriented toward stability and growth.³
The same thing cannot be said of fiscal policy. Minor reasons for a
lack of flexibility in this instrument are such restraints as debt ceilings
and interest limitations on government securities. The major difficulties,
however, are deeply held views on the desirability of budgetary
balance, suspicion of almost any increase in government spending,
conflicting views of interest groups on proper changes in the tax structure,
and, above all, a general distrust of government as a manager
of the economic environment. As one observer has noted, “Countercyclical
finance is attacked by conservatives in the United States because
of fear of irresponsible extension of government power while in
Europe it has been recognized as a conservative alternative to more
extreme government intervention [9, p. 605].”

It is somewhat difficult to understand the conservative American
view since there is no discernible support in the United States for government
ownership or control of activities now in the private sector.
Indeed, as I have pointed out, there is a strong disposition to “contract
out" to private enterprise services that tend elsewhere to be performed
by government. It seems possible that, over the longer run, this absence
of ideological conflict in the traditional sphere of government
versus private ownership may facilitate the development of a flexible
fiscal policy. In the shorter run, however, the obstacles are formidable.
Perhaps the critical questions are these: Will predilections for a budget
that is balanced, at least over the business cycle, prevent a shift
in fiscal policy toward a budget that is balanced only at full employment?
And will the tax reduction that may be involved in this process
strike some kind of an acceptable balance between the incentives to
investment demanded by the business group and the stimulus to consumption
demanded by labor? If not, the prospects for successful
stabilization policy are much darker than they need be.
In any case, the relative weakness of policy instruments in the
United States and the latent hostility apparent in government-business
relations tends to deprive growth targets of any operational significance.
It may be useful to project a 4 per cent growth rate at full
employment as a rough indication of the extent to which actual performance
falls short of potential but it cannot be assumed that any
one is going to do anything about it. The limitations that our institutional
structure plus current balance-of-payments considerations place
Although the monetary authority is certainly subject to strong pressures, its quasiupon


#### Split:

independent status appears to provide enough insulation to permit effective resistance.
8
