reference to the facts of individual situations. When remedial ends are
being sought, as in most aspects of contemporary control, legislative
policies must be adapted to a tremendous diversity of circumstances
and conditions. And direct legislative controls, however soundly
formulated in the first instance, would tend to issue in harmfully rigid
adjustments. It is because of such factors that the administrative
tribunal has come to be utilized as the dominant instrument of regulation.
Basic policies and guiding standards are prescribed by the
legislature; but the task of translating these policies and standards into
specific regulatory requirements is entrusted to administrative commissions,
fuctioning continuously and aided by technical staffs, which
promulgate their orders, after notice and hearing, on the basis of factual
records as developed in each proceeding, and whose determinations
are subject to judicial review. While there are minor variations from
these primary characteristics among the many permanent regulatory
bodies now operative, and while the pressures of emergency situations
have temporarily induced procedural short-cuts as well as extraordinary
extensions of public authority, this type of agency constitutes the
established norm for the control of economic conduct.
It is important to remember that this method of administrative
regulation represents no new device fashioned during the recent period
of intense control activity. State commissions with mandatory power
over railroads were first established in the 1870's; and in the federal
sphere the Interstate Commerce Commission, the most powerful of all
our peacetime administrative agencies exercising direct economic
control, dates back to 1887. The creation of this commission constituted
a deliberate Congressional choice over the alternative method of
legislative regulation, and the long intervening experience has but served
to confirm the wisdom of the choice. While numerous controversies have
developed in the course of the Commission's existence concerning the
nature and scope of the substantive policies to be established for its
guidance, there has been no disagreement as to the indispensability of
the administrative method for effectuating these policies, and there
has been no weakening of this conviction as the Commission's powers
have actually been expanded in notable degree. By the time of the
outbreak of the First World War, virtually all the states had constituted
administrative agencies, modeled upon the Interstate Commerce
Commission, for the regulation of public utilities, and the Federal Trade
Commission had been established to regulate competitive practices and
implement our antitrust policy in the general field of commerce and
industry. By that time, furthermore, a full generation ago, the developing
system of administrative law had been absorbed without serious
difficulty into our over-all legal framework. This was accomplished by a