V. The Growth of World Trade Since the War: The Case of the
Industrial Countries
11
I now come to the third wave of world-wide integration or reinte-
gration during the postwar period.
9
Since the end of the war, especially since 1948, world trade has
grown very rapidly. World exports rose from some $54 billion in 1948
to over $140 billion in mid-1963, and for the decade 1950-60 the com-
pound rate of growth of the volume of world exports was about 6 per
cent a year. It seems that for the first time in almost a hundred years
world trade has grown faster than world production for a period of
more than ten years. I mention this fact for two reasons, first, to con-
vey an idea of the rapidity of the growth and, second, because so much
has been made of the alleged fact that since the late nineteenth century
international trade has in most countries grown less fast than national
income. You will remember that years ago Werner Sombart tried to
establish a "historical law" of the "declining importance of interna-
tional trade." This alleged tendency has held a strange fascination for
many economists.¹¹ But I myself cannot see much importance in this
particular criterion. Whether trade has grown somewhat more or less
fast than GNP is hardly very significant unless the divergence is very
pronounced as it was in the 1930's. Here again the contours of the
trend have been blurred by the singular events of the Great Depres-
sion.12
The rapid rise in world trade is the consequence of, but has also
powerfully contributed to, the rapid growth of world production. The
performance with respect to growth and stability of the majority of
national economies of the world has, on the whole, been satisfactory-
not in an absolute sense of perfection, but satisfactory compared first
with earlier periods (not only the definitely unsatisfactory interwar
period), compared secondly with what was expected by many econo-
mists 20 years ago, and compared thirdly, I dare say, with what one.
9
* In average of 1955-60 prices. See [4] [22].
10 "Die These von der abnehmenden Bedeutung der internationalen Handelsbeziehungen"
or "der fallenden Exportquote," Werner Sombart in [20, pp. 368-71].
11
12
'See [16] for a good, brief discussion and references to the recent literature.
Lipsey [11, p. 44] found that as far as the United States is concerned “over the whole
period [1879-1960] the only suggestion of a downward trend in the ratio of the quantity of
trade to output was the low interwar export and postwar import ratios. Both now appear
to have been temporary." Lipsey reached his results by using constant dollar rather than
current value trade figures. The difference between current and deflated dollar value ratios of
trade and output stems from the fact that both export and import prices have fallen in the
long run compared with domestic prices. Hence a different deflator has to be used for the
two items of the ratio. If "invisible" exports and imports could be added to merchandise
trade, the statistical support for the theory of the declining trade-GNP ratio would be
further weakened.