1943] NOURSE: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THE COMMON INTEREST 19
I thus come back to Professor Viner, defender of the dogma of the
free market. I believe firmly that the process of group bargaining
which I have sketched satisfies the basic requirements of free market
adjustment for which he raises his voice, even though the units I deal
with are much larger than the individual. But a market of group
negotiators can be a free market only as the men who traffic in it
respect each other's freedom and light the course of their bargaining
by the torch of science rather than trying to solve the problems of a
delicate organic process by the crude devices of brute force.
I trust that no one will dismiss what I have said as a mere reversion
to simple-minded laissez-faire or suppose that I am proposing to turn
the country back to the Indians. The elaborate machinery of collective
bargaining which clearly is involved in these proposals should make it
plain that it is not anarchy but a most exacting and rigorous self-
government that is envisaged. This surely is no reversion to the blind
laissez-faire of unbridled individualism, which would permit the strong
to grow ever stronger by ruthless exploitation of a favorable institu-
tional situation at the expense of the weak, who are made ever weaker.
Under democratic institutions of group bargaining, the individual
would be given the fullest opportunity for economic self-expression, as a
member of a team within a league of teams. Technically qualified
leaders would be steadily emerging from the mass through demon-
strated efficiency in the actual task of business adjustment, not in the
arts and wiles of political persuasion or maneuver. It contemplates
strictly business solutions for business problems.
It may be replied that all that I have said is beside the point because
the parties at interest do not themselves want such a solution. Those
whose sincere belief and devoted support would be necessary to the
success of any system of responsible self-direction of business are not
ready to set up such economic institutions and live under them. In
effect, this would be to say that capitalists, managers, and laborers
still are economic isolationists at heart. Events may prove that for the
near-time future this is true, that militant concepts of group sovereignty
are preferred to frank and flexible experimentation with the building
of collective security on democratic patterns. But it is surely not too
soon to anticipate and plan for a day when a few of the most advanced
industrial nations will be able to organize their business life on the
basis of economic statesmanship and science in place of economic
guerilla war and group power politics.
interpreted and generalized with greater technical competence through the machinery
of collective bargaining than it can be expressed by the group representatives of consumers
sitting in on bargaining conferences. The situation, however, is distinctly different if con-
sumers are organized in a responsible consumers' coöperative for negotiating prices at which
they will buy stated quantities of specified articles.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:54:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
