The American Economic Review
VOLUME XXXIV
MARCH, 1944
NUMBER ONE
ECONOMY AND DEMOCRACY*
By A. B. WOLFE
It is fitting especially at this juncture, for the American Economic
Association, the American Political Science Association, and the Amer-
ican Society for Public Administration to meet together. The time has
long since passed when problems of economics and government could
be treated in splendid isolation. Every phase of our economy is affected
by legislation and administration, and practically every governmental
function has its economic implications. Economists and political scien-
tists have in common highly important scientific interests and public
responsibilities.
We have chosen liberty, security, and democracy as fundamental
values in our way of life. Ever since the Great Charter was wrung
from the reluctant King John, we have been endeavoring, bit by bit,
often with failures and retrogressions, and not always with clear under-
standing of what we were trying to do, to realize these ideals. During
most of the time from Runnymede to the twentieth century, they were
regarded as applicable only to some privileged part of the population.
One is tempted to say that more has been done to realize them—for the
forgotten man and all-in the past thirty years than in all the preceding
seven centuries. Be that as it may, however, we still have far to go.
Perfection we should neither counsel nor expect. Americans and
Britishers are no further removed, in time, from Cro-Magnon man, or
from the Teutonic barbarians who beat down Roman civilization, than
are the modern nazis. There are still some among us who have no use
for democracy; some who want liberty, but only for themselves; some
who are bent on preserving their own privileged security by denying
security to others; some, even in America, who think that race and sex
are valid grounds for inequality in civil status and economic oppor-
tunity. In a word, there are many who do lip service to democracy who
are far from democracy in spirit.
Moreover, in the further implementation of these basic ideals, we
shall encounter serious conflicts of values. We shall experience con-
* Presidential address delivered at the Fifty-Sixth Annual Meeting of The American
Economic Association, Washington, D.C., January 21, 1944.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:55:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
