curve for labor during this period would seem to be not far
from 3.0, and for capital, to be around 1.517

Let us now turn to the examination of the two time series and nine
cross-section studies which have been made for Australia, and which
are summarized in Table II, with its accompanying notes. In the Victorian
time study, k has a value of .84 and j of .23, while in the New
South Wales study, the value of k is .78, and that of j is .20. It should
be noticed, however, that the respective standard errors of k and j
are quite high and that the values of k under the original formula
(P bL*C¹-*) vary somewhat from those obtained under the second
-

formula.

As we would expect from the reasons which have been given, the
values of k in the nine cross-section studies for Australia are somewhat
lower. The combined average of the k's was .60 and of the j's
was .37. Their average sum was, therefore, .97. Here it will be observed
that we get identical results with either formula since the average of the
k's under formula (1) is also .60. It should also be noted that the
values of k are from 8 to 14 times and the j's from 3 to 10 times their
standard errors.

The results for the five Commonwealth studies differ somewhat from
those for the separate states, having somewhat lower k's and higher j's.
Thus, in the Commonwealth, the average of the k's is .55, with a spread
in individual years between .49 and .64, while the average for the four
state studies is .65. On the other hand, the j's average .43 in the Commonwealth,
as contrasted with .20 in the state studies. 18 After the text
"The marginal productivity of labor is

ӘР k

AL L

k

_

P ==

- bL kCi = MPL.

L

The elasticity of the marginal productivity curve for labor is then defined as
then

k P

1

MPL

1

L

n =

,

(MPT)

L

L

k(k-1)P L

L2

1

n =

•

k-1

The flexibility of the marginal productivity curve for labor is defined as the reciprocal
of the elasticity of this curve or

1

$1 = = = k − 1.

η

18 The values of k and j are each relatively large in relation to their standard errors.