many nonunion plants will be sensitive to changes in union scales. The
marginal efficiency of capital depends, among other things, upon the
control of management over costs. In the face of large and powerful
labor organizations, will American business possess sufficient control
over costs to maintain a high marginal efficiency of capital? Or will
unions keep investment opportunity limited by promptly converting
any increase in demand for labor into higher wages?²²
Many economists believe that bargained changes in costs are bound
to be completely translated into higher prices, so that changes in the
general wage level produce solely price effects and not output or em-
ployment effects. The relationship between bargained changes in costs
and prices is undoubtedly the most important issue in the theory of
employment. The conclusion that rises in costs are translated into
higher prices so that the return on investments is not affected presup-
poses, among other things, a self-contained economy. But even in a self-
contained economy, the assumed relationship between costs and prices
requires a theory of liquidity preference which is not convincing. It is
assumed that higher wages reduce liquidity preference and that the
shift in the schedule of liquidity preference so increases the volume of
active deposits that prices rise in proportion to the advance in wages.
All of this amounts to assuming that the volume of deposits held idle
is a residual and that it is independent of the purchasing power of the
idle deposits. These assumptions are far from realistic. If general
increases in the wage level cannot be counted on to produce offsetting
increases in expenditures and prices, a rise in labor's bargaining power
will tend to reduce the marginal efficiency of capital.24 The resulting
23
22 In other words, will unions prevent any expansion of demand from producing more
employment by causing it to produce higher wages?
23
Suppose that the first reaction of managements to a rise in costs were to advance prices
in proportion. To sustain the higher price level the public would have to be willing to
hold a smaller amount of real purchasing power in cash. It is not clear why a rise in prices
should produce this result, except as higher prices reduce the purchasing power of incomes.
This might produce some tendency to reduce idle deposits. But the drop in the purchasing
power of money would also limit the decrease in idle deposits since the quantity of money
which people desire to hold idle is presumably affected by its purchasing power. Equilibrium
would eventually be reached at some point below the original volume of output and
employment, but with money expenditures somewhat above the original level. In the
above analysis, it is assumed that the demand for assets in the form of idle deposits is such
that idle deposits drop as the purchasing power of money drops. It is possible, however,
that a drop in the purchasing power of money will cause an increase in the number of dollars
held idle. In that event an effort to pass on an increase in costs in the form of higher
prices would produce an even greater drop in output and employment.
24 It is conceivable that wages might get so low and that such a large proportion of the
national income might go to savings and such a small part to labor that further reductions
in wages would cause more than a proportionate drop in total expenditures. As the
increase in investment-seeking funds produced a drop in the marginal return on invest-
ments, the proportion of money held idle would increase. Eventually it would increase so
rapidly as more than to offset the effect of the drop in costs and prices upon the physical