350
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
III
So soon as we have realized the possibility of ideological bias, it is
not difficult to locate it. All we have to do for this purpose is to
scrutinize scientific procedure. It starts from the perception of a set
of related phenomena which we wish to analyze and ends up for the
time being with a scientific model in which these phenomena are
conceptualized and the relations between them explicitly formulated,
either as assumptions or as propositions (theorems). This primitive
way of putting it may not satisfy the logician but it is all we need
for our hunt for ideological bias. Two things should be observed.
First, that perception of a set of related phenomena is a pre-
scientific act. It must be performed in order to give to our minds
something to do scientific work on-to indicate an object of research
-but it is not scientific in itself. But though prescientific, it is not
preanalytic. It does not simply consist in perceiving facts by one or
more of our senses. These facts must be recognized as having some
meaning or relevance that justifies our interest in them and they must
be recognized as related—so that we might separate them from others
-which involves some analytic work by our fancy or common sense.
This mixture of perceptions and prescientific analysis we shall call the
research worker's Vision or Intuition. In practice, of course, we hardly
ever start from scratch so that the prescientific act of vision is not
entirely our own. We start from the work of our predecessors or con-
temporaries or else from the ideas that float around us in the public
mind. In this case our vision will also contain at least some of the
results of previous scientific analysis. However, this compound is still
given to us and exists before we start scientific work ourselves.
Second, if I have identified with “model building" the scientific
analysis that operates upon the material proffered by the vision, I
must add at once that I intend to give the term "model" a very wide
meaning. The explicit economic model of our own day and its analoga
in other sciences are of course the product of late stages of scientific
endeavor. Essentially, however, they do not do anything that is not
present in the earliest forms of analytic endeavor which may therefore
also be said to have issued, with every individual worker, in primitive,
fragmentary, and inefficient models. This work consists in picking out
certain facts rather than others, in pinning them down by labeling
them, in accumulating further facts in order not only to supplement
but in part also to replace those originally fastened upon, in formulating
and improving the relations perceived-briefly, in "factual" and
"theoretical" research that go on in an endless chain of give and take,
the facts suggesting new analytic instruments (theories) and these
in turn carrying us toward the recognition of new facts. This is as
