2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
flict between liberty and economic efficiency, and between liberty and
security. We shall be able to deal with such conflicts only through the
patience, the forbearance, and the pragmatic compromises which are
democracy at its best; but the stream of history, the direction of moral
evolution, will not reverse its flow. Liberty, security, democracy, and
equality of opportunity are established ideals in the ethos of our civili-
zation, and there is no reason to suppose that they will not remain so.
The culture in which these values are dominant constitutes the
atmosphere in which we do our work. The atmosphere will sometimes
be murky as on the eve of a presidential election-and the visibility
low. There will be, as there is today, much verbal camouflage, and
divergent interests will attach incompatible meanings to liberty, to
security, and to democracy. Under such conditions, economists and
political scientists must accept the responsibility, not only to be fair,
unbiased, and objective in their collection and analysis of factual data,
but also to distinguish between verbalisms and substantive reality, and
to judge between the conflicting interests which economic and political
institutions can be made to serve.
It may seem that I am bent on breaking down the line-fence between
economics and political science, and between these two disciplines on
one side and social or moral philosophy on the other. That, indeed, is
precisely my intent. In all handling of factual data, and in all logical
analysis, I am as much convinced of the necessity for scientific ob-
jectivity as the most lily-white, “pure," economist can be. But I am
unwilling to regard any social science as merely an indoor sport. Eco-
nomics and political science are purposive sciences. Being purposive,
they must be concerned with ends as well as instrumentalities. This
means that they cannot escape value-judgments.
Values
The only final value is human life, or rather human living, with all its
richness and fullness of experience. This, I take it, is what Ruskin
meant when he exclaimed, “There is no wealth but life!" The intrinsic
values comprise the things which constitute the positive content of
living, the things we desire for their own sake-work and play, love
and friendship, hearth and home, and so on, together with such general
conditions as peace, security, liberty, and opportunity. The huge class
of instrumental values includes all our material wealth of whatever
kind, all our technological knowledge, all government, and all the eco-
nomic processes of production and exchange. In fact all social institu-
tions belong in this category of instrumental values-means to some-
thing nearer the heart of man.
Contrary to totalitarian philosophy, no social institution, not even
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:55:38 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
