20
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
serious handicap is the lack of appreciation in the profession and out-
side of it of the economist whose research does not produce earth-
shaking results. Even knowing where to begin is not simple.
Suggestions which might prove helpful for economic research, par-
ticularly on practical public-policy questions, include these: Public
agencies might well consider "farming out" research on economic prob-
lems to universities in the manner of the natural science agencies, far
more than they are now doing. They also might prepare compendia on
practical research subjects not urgently requiring immediate answers,
with data on sources of information. Mature scholars could do the same
and foundations profitably could aid them financially to make such re-
ports.
The important matter of giving credit for research to the academic
people who do such work is, first and foremost, a matter of recognition
within the profession. Economists, like all other people, appreciate most
the good opinion of their fellows. Yet the economists seem to be
much more given to knocking than to boosting each other. The theorists
scoff at institutionalists and vice versa. Worse is the fact that even men
in the same department generally know little about the research their
colleagues are doing. One small step toward improvement might be
to give all members of the department an opportunity, at least once a
year, to talk to their colleagues about the research in which they are
engaged. In smaller institutions, the traditional general economics
seminar might well serve this purpose; in larger institutions, regular or
special department meetings. The regional economics associations, I
believe, have their greatest value in affording a forum to younger and
less well-known scholars. This is also one of the values and justifications
for the growing number of allied social science associations which sup-
plement the American Economic Association. While their existence has
the tendency to make the programs of the A.E.A. meetings more
theoretical and to give most of the places to the limited number of econ-
omists with reputations for original work in economic theory (most of
whom are connected with a small number of large universities), the allied
association affords opportunities to give recognition to the larger num-
ber of economists who work in applied fields and on practical problems.
Above all, I plead for tolerance among economists for differing points
of view and varying fields of usefulness. Is it too much to expect or at
least to hope that economists will adopt the attitude which prevails in
the older professions? Lawyers, who put on a great show in battling each
other in the court room and on the hustings, always speak of each
other's reputations in terms of praise and will insist that a lawyer should
be selected for every position which even remotely may require some
speaking acquaintance with the law. Doctors seldom will expose errors
