The regional integration schemes that are now in the process of reali-
zation have developed strongly protectionist features which go far
beyond their unavoidable discriminatory effects. This is true of the
European Common Market and even more so of its Latin American
counterpart. In fact, as far as the latter is concerned, it is an understate-
ment to say that protectionist tendencies have appeared. The Latin.
American Free Trade Area (LAFTA) has been conceived openly and
frankly as a protectionist device from its beginning.26 On the other hand,
many of the managers and supporters of EEC inside and outside the
six members sincerely regard the Common Market as a step towards
freer trade. But good intentions even on the part of the managers are
not enough. An international enterprise of that magnitude, once it has
been launched with a tremendous effort and enthusiasm and has been
institutionalized through the creation of a heavy politico-bureaucratic
machinery, tends to develop its own logic and movement. After it has
gathered momentum, it becomes very difficult to steer it in another
direction. This has been discovered, to their sorrow, by the vocal
and vigorous forces which, working from within and from without
EEC, have been trying to persuade the Community to adopt an "out-
ward looking attitude," as the phrase goes. A crucial test as to whether
or not it can be made to move in the direction of freer trade will come
next year when the negotiations begin in earnest on the so-called Ken-
nedy-round of tariff reductions in Geneva.
Let us hope that this noble experiment will succeed, that tariffs
between the industrial countries and on imports from the less developed
countries will be drastically reduced. Then the future economic histo-
rian will be able to say of the European Economic Community what
Marshall said of the German Zollverein-it was a big step toward freer
multilateral trade.
REFERENCES
1. MILTON FRIEDMAN AND ANNA SCHWARTZ, Monetary History of the
United States. New York 1963.
2. GOTTFRIED HABERLER, “International Trade and Economic Development,"
National Bank of Egypt, Fiftieth Anniversary Commemoration Lectures.
Cairo 1956.
26 This does not necessarily mean that it is undesirable. There are valid arguments for
protection which theoretically can be applied to customs unions or free trade areas. In the
case of LAFTA, the protectionist effects are, however, so strong that it would be very
difficult to make a rational case for it on, say, infant-industry grounds. It could conceivably
be defended with the help of a theory of the third or fourth best. Let me briefly indicate
what I have in mind. By means of a policy of partly repressed inflation, tight exchange
control, etc. a country can maneuver itself into a position where trade is so sharply con-
tracted and distorted that even bilateral trade is better than no trade. Similarly, a regional
trade expansion may be better than no expansion at all, although a relaxation of controls
and general expansion of trade would be infinitely better.