seems preferable to use terms more accurately descriptive of the several
things that government actually does in the economy. Confining "regulation"
to direct government interference with private decision-making,
government's activities in the economy go far beyond regulation.
To begin with, government is the rule maker and the umpire in the
American system of free enterprise. Property, contract, patents, bankruptcy
in fact, all existing economic institutions are defined by law.
They represent bundles of rights and duties which may be modified and
even terminated by constitutional processes. All basic economic institutions
have undergone great changes in the course of American history.
Property in human beings, at the time of the Constitution second in
value only to land, has been abolished and the uses of many other types
of property have been restricted in numerous respects. On the other
hand, good will and other market expectations, almost unknown at the
time of the Constitution, are now protected as property and collectively
are of greater value than older, tangible forms of property. Changes in
basic institutions must conform with constitutional limitations, but
this has not prevented extensive changes. Such changes are still occurring
and in all probability will continue to occur, as may be dictated
by the needs and wisdom of the time.
Also most inadequately appreciated by economists has been the direct
and indirect financial aid extended by government to many businesses
in the United States throughout American history. Classical economics
condemned “extraordinary encouragements" as well as "extraordinary
restraints," but both have always existed in this country-and on a
large scale. In recent years there has been a great outcry about
government aids to agriculture. Historically, however, aids to other
lines of business have been greater and may still be greater in the aggregate.
The lands granted by Congress for the construction of the
transcontinental railroads exceeded in area that of the entire State of
Texas. Large aids by government, principally the state and local governments,
were extended also for the construction of railroads in the older
sections of the country-and earlier, of canals and turnpikes. Direct aids
to shipping and ship building, airlines and aviation, mining and fisheries
are more recent but also extensive. A large part of the capital for the
development of new and risky industries has been supplied by government
and never more extensively than in the present age. Whenever any
major line of business has financial difficulties, it has turned to government
for aid and, quite commonly, has received aid. Indirect aids,
taking the form of protective tariffs, subsidies, loans, tax allowances,
reduced mail rates, and similar privileges, have been no less important.
Free enterprise, as we have known it, has always included a large
amount of governmental aid to private business.