been if the top 5 per cent of 1870 had, through their descendants, filled
completely the ranks of the top 5 per cent of the population of 1920.
Although the cumulative effect of savings may be to raise the relative
income of a progressively diminishing top proportion of total popula-
tion, their effect on the relative share of a fixed top proportion of the
population is much reduced.
The second group of forces resides in the very nature of a dynamic
economy with relative freedom of individual opportunity. In such a
society technological change is rampant and property assets that
originated in older industries almost inevitably have a diminishing
proportional weight in the total because of the more rapid growth of
younger industries. Unless the descendants of a high-income group
manage to shift their accumulating assets into new fields and partici-
pate with new entrepreneurs in the growing share of the new and more
profitable industries, the long-range returns on their property holdings
are likely to be significantly lower than those of the more recent
entrants into the class of substantial asset holders. "From shirt-sleeves
to shirt-sleeves in three generations" probably exaggerates the effects
of this dynamism of a growing economy: there are, among the upper-
income groups of today, many descendants of the upper-income groups
of more than three or even four generations ago. But the adage is
realistic in the sense that a long unbroken sequence of connection with
rising industries and hence with major sources of continued large
property incomes is exceedingly rare; that the successful great entre-
preneurs of today are rarely sons of the great and successful entrepre-
neurs of yesterday.
The third group of factors is suggested by the importance, even in
the upper-income brackets, of service income. At any given time, only
a limited part of the income differential of a top group is accounted for
by the concentration of property yields: much of it comes from the
high level of service income (professional and entrepreneurial earnings
and the like). The secular rise in the upper incomes due to this source is
likely to be less marked than in the service incomes of lower brackets,
and for two somewhat different reasons. First, in so far as high levels
of service incomes of given upper units are due to individual excellence
(as is true of many professional and entrepreneurial pursuits), there
is much less incentive for and possibility of keeping such incomes at
continued high relative levels. Hence, the service incomes of the de-
scendants of an initially high level unit are not likely to show as strong
an upward trend as the incomes for the large body of population at
lower-income levels. Second, a substantial part of the rising trend in
per capita income is due to interindustry shift, i.e., a shift of workers
from lower-income to higher-income industries. The possibilities of rise