lems arose in the process of developing legal rights that would put a
creditor in as strong a position as possible to enforce a debt contract
without jeopardizing the personal freedom of the debtor. The importance
of reasonable protection for the creditor in our present economy
is obvious. But obviously too it has been necessary to rule out the possibility
of enslavement or imprisonment for debt as a means of debt
collection.
Serious problems of reconciling the institutional arrangements for
economic organization with those that give personal freedom have
arisen too in another connection. When employees bargain with employers
as individuals the law has the effect of clothing the employers
with autocratic quasigovernmental powers-the powers of prescribing
and administering shop rules and imposing penalties. Partly in order
to get rid of the restrictions on personal freedom that such autocratic
powers entail and to give employees a voice in shop rules and provide
something like due process in their administration there has been a decided
shift of public policy toward favoring collective bargaining. But
no doubt this shift is also to an important extent, like most other phases
of labor legislation, a recognition that competition cannot be relied
upon to perform the regulatory function in the labor market.
I do not wish to minimize the problems connected with employeremployee
bargaining. But for brevity I will pass them over with a
single comment. So far as the interests of employees are concerned the
case for substituting collective for individual bargaining is a strong
one; but the substitution may leave the interests of an important
group of third parties, viz. the consumers, quite inadequately protected.
For brevity too I will pass over the question, How fully have we
eliminated the restrictions on personal freedom that were introduced
into our social order in the first place through the development of the
employer-employee relationship? My present concern is not with what
has been accomplished here. Rather it is with the general approach we
have taken to deal with the conflict between our bill of rights and the
rights of business management which are part of the legal foundation
of our free-enterprise system. The approach has been to resolve that
conflict by a significant curtailment of the rights of management, a
significant restriction of the right to hire and fire. And the objective has
been to promote personal freedom. Even if the accomplishment falls
somewhat short of the intent, I think we should regard what has been
done as illustrating a broad basic general policy proposition, viz.: When
a conflict arises between our free enterprise system and the objective
of developing and strengthening our bill of personal rights and liberties,
it is the free enterprise system that should yield.