these respects of the general course of control experience. It is neither
desirable nor feasible, in the complexities of modern industrial society,
to restrict governmental functions to a closed category fashioned by
the near-absolutes of a dead past.
Nor does greater validity attach to such strictures upon the development
of public control as derive their primary impulse from want of
confidence in government and politics. Governments can be and have
been arbitrary, discriminatory, and tyrannical; and it is a sound
instinct that seeks to restrict government intervention in economic
affairs to the compelling requirements of public interest, centered upon
the gradual but progressive improvement of the lot of the individual.
But in a democratic society such collective requirements cannot be
indefinitely ignored; and only government provides a sufficiently allinclusive
instrument to encompass and represent the entire community
in the totality of its economic relations. In time of war we dedicate our
lives and all our resources to a vital common end, and we rely upon
government unstintingly to effectuate this end. Common ends of great
significance also emerge in times of peace, and in the economic sphere
control policies, molded by the specific exigencies of recurring need,
constitute practical expressions of such collective purposes. Whether
in peace or war, particular measures may be ill-adapted to the ends held
in view, and may indeed prove positively harmful. Furthermore, the
exercise of governmental authority may be impaired or vitiated by
corrupt practices and inefficient methods. But such defects of government,
occasionally resulting in situations sufficiently extreme to be
termed scandalous, have their counterparts in the administration of
private business enterprise; and in any event, the remedy lies in the
improvement of government in all its various branches a widely
recognized need which becomes increasingly urgent as the scope of
public control is expanded-rather than in the artificial restriction of
governmental functions.
And like observations appear to be justified with respect to reliance
upon the shortcomings of politics as a ground for resisting necessary
controls. The unlovely aspects of politics are common knowledge and
need not be detailed here. Improvement in political methods is as
essential as improvement in government as a whole. But in considerable
measure politics is government in action; and politics can no more be
wished out of existence, or be regarded as an inherent obstacle to the
adoption of needed control measures, than government itself. Moreover,
the significant constructive services rendered by politics in the sphere
of policy-making are generally overlooked. The often alarming activities
of pressure groups tend in many instances to offset one another; and it
is political rivalry, animated in some degree by divergent faiths and at