2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
of income per capita, we should measure shares of some fixed ordinal
groups-percentiles, deciles, quintiles, etc. In the underlying array the
units should be classified by average income levels for a sufficiently long
span so that they form income-status groups-say a generation or
about 25 years. Within such a period, even when classified by secular
income levels, units may shift from one ordinal group to another. It
would, therefore, be necessary and useful to study separately the rela-
tive share of units that, throughout the generation period of reference,
were continuously within a specific ordinal group, and the share of the
units that moved into that specific group; and this should be done for
the shares of "residents" and "migrants" within all ordinal groups.
Without such a long period of reference and the resulting separation
between "resident” and “migrant" units at different relative income
levels, the very distinction between “low” and “high” income classes
loses its meaning, particularly in a study of long-term changes in shares
and in inequalities in the distribution. To say, for example, that the
"lower" income classes gained or lost during the last twenty years in
that their share of total income increased or decreased has meaning only
if the units have been classified as members of the "lower" classes
throughout those 20 years and for those who have moved into or out.
of those classes recently such a statement has no significance.
Furthermore, if one may add a final touch to what is beginning to
look like a statistical economist's pipe dream, we should be able to trace
secular income levels not only through a single generation but at least
through two-connecting the incomes of a given generation with those
of its immediate descendants. We could then distinguish units that,
throughout a given generation, remain within one ordinal group and
whose children-through their generation—are also within that group,
from units that remain within a group through their generation but
whose children move up or down on the relative economic scale in their
time. The number of possible combinations and permutations becomes
large; but it should not obscure the main design of the income structure
called for the classification by long-term income status of a given
generation and of its immediate descendants. If living members of
society as producers, consumers, savers, decision-makers on secular
problems-react to long-term changes in income levels and shares, data
on such an income structure are essential. An economic society can then
be judged by the secular level of the income share that it provides for
a given generation and for its children. The important corollary is that
the study of long-term changes in the income distribution must distin-
guish between changes in the shares of resident groups-resident within
either one or two generations and changes in the income shares of
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Fri, 09 Sep 2022 01:18:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
