17 to 38 times their standard errors and the j's from 12 to 18 times as
great as their standard errors.
On the whole, we should not be surprised by the fact that we obtain
higher values for k and lower values for j in our first three time series
studies than we do for the cross-section studies. For as we have pointed
out, the two functions are, in fact, somewhat different and we should
not necessarily expect identical results. Moreover, in the time studies,
there tends to be a systematic downward bias to the index of produc-
tion which keeps it closer to the index of labor than it should be in
reality and hence gives an excessive value to k. This downward bias is
caused by two factors: (1) Since the indexes are primarily based on
the quantities of raw material produced, they do not include the in-
creased fabrication and reworking of these materials which is a pro-
nounced, although not a universal, tendency of industry. (2) It is in
practice not possible to include with sufficient rapidity the new
products which are continually pushing themselves forward, nor to drop
in adequate time the products which are becoming obsolete. The net
result is to keep the index numbers of Product (P), particularly during
the latter years of a given period, closer to Labor (L) than in reality
they should be and hence k is raised above and j is depressed below
their "true" values.
This weakness is absent from the cross-section or inter-industry
studies, which are made for a given year, and we would, therefore,
expect the k's to be lower and the j's to be higher in this group of
studies. Such is, in fact, exactly the case.
It may be of some significance that when the factor of time is
eliminated from each of the three basic series of Labor, Capital, and
Product, and the deviations from the trends are studied (as in Series
IV), that the true value of k for the period of 1899-1922 is reduced to
.63. This is identical with the average value of k for the six years for
which inter-industry studies were made.
It may also be of some significance that in three of the four time
earners, salaried employees, supervisory officials, firm members, and working proprietors;
(2) Capital (C)= total fixed and working capital; (3) Product (P) = gross sales value minus
(a) cost of raw materials, (b) cost of fuel, heat, power, and rent, (c) taxes and insurance pay-
ments, (d) amounts paid to contractors, (e) cost of repairs, (f) sundries. No deduction has been
made for the depreciation of fixed capital except that included under the heading of "repairs."
For earlier studies on four of these years see Gunn and Douglas, "The Production Function
for American Manufacturing for 1919," Am. Econ. Rev., Vol. XXXI (Mar., 1941) pp. 67–80;
Gunn and Douglas, "The Production Function for American Manufacturing for 1914," Jour.
Pol. Econ., Vol. L (Aug., 1942), pp. 595-602; Bronfenbrenner and Douglas, "Cross-Section
Studies in the Cobb-Douglas Function," Jour. Pol. Econ., Vol. XLVII (Dec., 1939), pp.
761-85; Daly, Olson and Douglas, "The Production Function for Manufacturing in the United
States in 1904," Jour. Pol. Econ., Vol. LI (Feb., 1943), pp. 61-65. A more complete description
of the methods and results for 1889 will shortly be published by Miss Estelle Mass.