found the value of k was .66, and that for j, .32. When he made white
and black labor separate factors of production and broke manufacturing
down into eighty-five industries, the sum of the two exponents for
labor amounted to .65. While we cannot rely too much upon only one
study, it is of interest that his results were substantially the same as
those which we obtained on the average for the United States for the
period 1889-1919 and not far from the Australian results. This would
be equivalent to an elasticity of approximately 3.0 for the marginal
productivity curve for labor and of 1.5 for the marginal productivity
curve for capital.

If we try to summarize our results, we do find a relatively close
agreement between the values of k and j which we obtain from the
cross-section studies for the United States, Australia, and South Africa.
But we also find differences in the values of k and j (1) between
Canada and New Zealand, on the one hand, and the United States,
upon the other, with the former having lower k's and higher j's than
the United States, and (2) between years within the same country.
This is to be expected, as I pointed out long ago in a section of my
Theory of Wages. 21 But underneath all these differences, it is submitted
that there has been for the periods studied, a substantial core of stability
within countries and that differences in technique, differences in the
relative importance of given industries, and differences in the ratios
of capital to labor may account for such deviations in the values of the
exponents as exist. 22

21

'Douglas, The Theory of wages, pp. 203-4.

22 The economic and statistical meaning of b deserves to be considered.
A. In the four time series for the United States, the values of b under formula (1) are
closely approximate to unity. For the United States the values are the same for each of
the four series.

Series I

Series II

b

1.01

Series III

1.01

Series IV

b

1.01





#### Split:

1.01

(Footnote 22 continued on next page)

ers, salaried workers, etc.; (2) Capital (C) = total capital used, i.e., (a) fixed capital in the form
of land, buildings, plant, tools, and machinery plus (b) working capital including materials,
goods in process, and goods in storage. The inclusion of working capital makes the results
comparable with the cross-section studies for the United States but differentiates them from
the series used in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. (3) Product (P)= gross sales
value minus cost of materials, fuel, electricity, etc., used. See Patricia Daly (Ogburn) and
Paul H. Douglas, "The Production Function for Canadian Manufactures," Jour. Am. Stat.
Assoc., Vol. XXXVIII (1943), pp. 178–86.

* Professor Williams defined his terms as follows: (1) Labor (L) = number of persons engaged;
(2) Capital (C) = value of land, buildings, plant, and machinery, i.e., fixed capital.
(3) Product (P) = gross sales value of product minus cost of materials, fuel, and power. See
J. W. Williams, op. cit., p. 59.
