competitive level; indeed in its pertinent empirical sense marginal cost
pricing would mean cut-throat pricing for most businesses most of the
time. Moreover, the market that approximates the perfect model might
be say the market for a dangerously infected food or the market for
the services of prostitutes. Still the clearest case for relying primarily
on competition to produce an adjustment that conforms to sound pub-
lic policy is in a market where there are many traders on both sides
and where all terms except the prices are uniform and fixed so that
perfect market conditions are approximated.
Alternatively when price competition and competition on other terms
of trade are combined, the regulatory function may be impaired. In-
deed, as Henry Carter Adams long ago pointed out, in such circum-
stances the tendency may be to lower the plane of competition and
"force the moral sentiment pervading any trade down to the level of
the worst man. . . in it." This quotation comes from Adams' essay
entitled "The State in Relation to Industrial Action."
...
118
An extreme difference between the number of buyers and the number
of sellers in a market is a further circumstance that may impair the
regulatory function of competition, for it is likely to mean that the less
numerous traders on the one side of the market are specialists at the
trade, while the very much larger number on the other side are ama-
teurs.
Nonetheless, where the more numerous traders are buyers, even
when sellers are competing in quality of product and in sales effort as
well as in price, provided certain conditions are satisfied, it is possible
that the regulatory function of competition may be reasonably well
performed. Some years ago J. M. Clark proposed the term "workable
competition” for these conditions.³ The two main ones he specified are:
(1) that the demand curve confronting the individual seller shall be
neither too elastic nor too inelastic, and (2) that there shall be just
enough of a tendency for sellers to cut prices in dull times and raise
them when business is brisk—that is, just enough demand elasticity
and just enough price flexibility to assure prices that shall be neither
unreasonably high nor unreasonably low. But presumably Clark had
in mind at least one further condition. I assume he meant a market in
which a limited number of sellers announce their prices and other terms
of sale in advance and in which buyers are moderately well-though
not too promptly-informed regarding seller deviations from list prices.


#### Split:
The State in Relation to Industrial Action, Publications of the American Economic
Association, Vol. I, No. 6, 1887. This essay and Adams' presidential address are reprinted
in J. Dorfman, ed., The State in Relation to Industrial Action and Economics and Juris-
prudence (New York, 1954).
8
J. M. Clark, "Toward a Concept of Workable Competition," Am. Econ. Rev., June 1940,
XXX, 241-56.