it is difficult to brush off the longer-term implications. If stagnation
persists the labor pressure for a thirty-five hour week is going to
assume dangerous proportions and what this would do to our balance
of payments problem is not pleasant to contemplate. Furthermore, as
firms operate at relatively low levels of capacity, the expectations on
which price and investment policies are based are bound to be affected.
There is some evidence of this already, and there is enough in the
administered price doctrine to justify a fear that in many markets
adjustment of price policies to lower use of capacity is a relatively
easy matter. A real danger of stagnation is that in an economy in
which economic units are large enough to resist the pressure of market
forces it will induce policies and practices that insure the persistence
of stagnation.

But, having recognized that no one of the numerous protagonists
is likely to have a monopoly of the truth, how is the relationship of
the various interest groups to each other and to government in the
United States likely to affect the choice among various possible stabilization
and growth policies? To deal with this question it is necessary
to say something about these relationships, to consider what
limitations, if any, they impose on policy choices, and to offer an
opinion on the question whether, in view of these limitations, the possibilities
that seem to be open are adequate to the problems that confront
us.

There is an old saying to the effect that every country gets the
socialists it deserves. It is equally true that every country gets the
government, the type of business leaders, and the forms of labor organization
it deserves. This is no more than to observe that institutions
and group relations are shaped in an historical context that differs
substantially from country to country. It is clear to the most obtuse
observer that there is a much more distant relationship between business
and government leadership in the United States, than, say, in
Britain, France, or the Netherlands. The Federation of British Industries
has an entree to government, whether Conservative or Labour,
that neither the National Association of Manufacturers nor the Chamber
of Commerce has or, for that matter, would desire. A British
businessman can say, "Some of my best friends are civil servants,"
and really mean it. This would be rare in the United States.
In France the relationship, at least since the war, has been even
closer. The type of planning favored in France brings together government
and business decision-makers, with their technicians, on a long
series of critical economic issues. I shall want to say something later
about the relevance of French practice to the United States but it is
obvious that what is called indicative planning in France demands