done this in their discussions of the subject of information, its avail-
ability, its uncertainty, and its subjectivity. I mean, of course, infor-
mation available to the "firm," and this raises the question whether we
mean the firm as a purely theoretical construct or the firm as an orga-
nization of real people or anything else.
The firm as a theoretical construct has exactly the kind of informa-
tion the theorist chooses to endow it with in order to design a good,
useful theory. The firm as an organization of real people has the infor-
mation system that it actually happens to have and which, in some in-
stances, the management scientists (operations researchers) have suc-
ceeded in developing. For purposes of competitive price and allocation
theory, it does not make much difference whether the information
which we assume the firm to have concerning the conditions of supply,
production, and demand under which it works is correct or incorrect,
as long as we may safely assume that any change in these conditions is
registered correctly. If we want to inquire into the effects of a change
in wage rates or tax rates or something of this sort, we must of course
take it for granted that the decision-makers who supposedly react to
the change have taken notice of it. But whether their “previous” store
of information-from which they started when the change occurred—
was accurate or not will only in exceptional instances make a qualita-
tive difference to the reactions.
This important difference between information about conditions and
information about changes in conditions has eluded several writers,
who shouted "tautology" when they confronted my statements about
the subjectivity of information. They reasoned like this: If firms act
on the basis of information which is entirely subjective, then anything
they do may be said to follow from whatever they believe they know:
hence, the assumption of subjectivism defeats any explanatory pur-
poses. This is a sad confusion. In teaching elementary economics we
ought to be able to make our students grasp the difference between the
shape and position of a curve, on the one hand, and the shift of a
curve, on the other. The direction of the effects which we derive from
the shift is usually, though not always, independent of the shape and
position of the original curve. We need not fuss about the curve
reflecting "accurate information" if we only want to see what happens
when the curve shifts in a certain direction.


#### Split:
common good. I hope I am not excessively naive if I believe that the excess profits
secured through restrictions on competition are to no small extent used for what the
discretionary managers believe to be worthy causes. But I see no way of formulating any
hypotheses that would enable us to predict either just what the firms' outlays in the public
interest will be or how they will affect total output in the long run. I suppose that
Boulding's witty question, "do we maximize profit subject to the constraints of morality
or do we maximize virtue subject to the constraints of satisfactory profits? [7, p. 17]
was not intended to suggest an answer with empirically fertile conclusions.