cent reduction in the literature on consumer surplus? Why have we
been content to leave the problem of policy unstudied?
This variously phrased question can be considered to be a request
for either a formal theory of state action or a set of empirical studies
of the comparative advantages of public and private control.
Consider first the control over economic life as a formal theoretical
problem. Why do we not have a theory to guide us in ascertaining the
areas of comparative advantage of uncontrolled private enterprise,
competitive private enterprise, public regulation, public operation, and
the other forms of economic organization? This theory would predict
the manner in which the state would conduct various economic activi-
ties, such as protecting consumers from monopoly or fraud, assisting
distressed industries and areas, or stimulating inventions. The theory
might yield rules such as that a competitive system is superior for in-
troducing new products, or public enterprise is superior where there are
many parties to a single transaction. That we have not done so is at-
tributable, I conjecture, to two difficulties.
The first difficulty is that the issue of public control had a constantly
changing focus: it was the relations of labor and employers one year,
the compensation to tenants for improvements on farms and the con-
trol of railroad rates the year thereafter. At any one time few areas
of economic life were seriously in dispute: most economic activities
were uncontroversially private or public. That a single theory should
be contrived to guide society in dealing with these various and chang-
ing problems was perhaps too great an abstraction to encourage serious
efforts.
Moreover, and this is the second difficulty, the standard apparatus of
the economist is not clearly appropriate. Ordinary maximizing be-
havior, with the ordinary rewards and obstacles of economic analysis,
does not seem directly applicable to the problem. The bounds of state
competence, and the areas of its superiority over variously controlled
private action, are difficult to bring within a coherent theoretical sys-
tem.
In short, the theory of public policy may be a difficult theory to de-
vise, although until we have tried to devise it even this opinion is un-
certain.
A usable theory of social control of economic life was not essential,
however, to professional study of policy: could not the economist make
empirical studies of the effects of various ways of dealing with specific
problems? The state regulates machinery in factories: does this reduce
accidents appreciably? The state regulated the carriage of emigrants
from England and Ireland to the new world-what did the regulations
achieve? A thousand prices had been regulated-were they lower or