is not regularly listed among the evangelists. But he was in fact a
bishop in the Church, and another churchman, of the civilized
eighteenth-century French pattern, the abbot Galiani, had earlier
stated the same creed. And anyhow, the saying suits my purpose as a
text. It is, no doubt, usually enjoyed and dismissed as a witty cynicism;
but I propose to treat it quite seriously, as a starting-point. Not literally,
I admit. It is an epigram; and an epigram has been defined as
a half-truth so stated as to be especially annoying to those who believe
in the other half. I wish to stress both halves, the value of principles as
well as their limitations. Accordingly, I must re-word the text into one
of rather the opposite literal import. The right principle is to respect
all the principles, take them fully into account, and then use good
judgment as to how far to follow one or another in the case in hand.
All principles are false, because all are true-in a sense and to a degree;
hence, none is true in a sense and to a degree which would deny to
others a similarly qualified truth. There is always a principle, plausible
and even sound within limits, to justify any possible course of action
and, of course, the opposite one. The truly right course is a matter
of the best compromise, or the best or "least-worst" combination of
good and evil. As in cookery, and in economic theory, it calls for
enough and not too much, far enough and not too far, in any direction.
Moreover, the ingredients of policy are always imponderable, hence
there can be no principle, no formula, for the best compromise. That
laws must be stated in sentences partly accounts for the familiar
"principle," "the law is an ass." And if people don't have good judgment,
or won't use it, it is “just too bad," for themselves and for others
over whom they have power.

* * *

After so much by way of "preliminary," I am at last ready for some
consideration of economic principles. These have, or surely ought to
have, two kinds of significance: in explaining what does happen and
in providing guidance for bringing about what is thought desirable or
what "ought" to happen. In the first rôle they assimilate to principles of
science; in the second, they raise questions of political principle, since
action must be primarily political, and both economic and political
principles are inseparable from ethics. Political principles are of course
affected by the same ambiguity, they both explain and direct, and this
is also true in a sense of the ethical. The problem is complicated by
the tangled relation between the two concerns, explanation and critical
evaluation; for these also are inseparable, yet are finally contradictory.
A complete explanation shows why an event is inevitable, given the
antecedent circumstances; hence it excludes purposive control. Here