KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
15
lar, don't expect too much of "the state"; be very critical in appraising
the prospects for good and for harm to result before calling on
"Leviathan" and giving him power. In the scope of this address, this,
the most vital conclusion, must be stated rather than argued; but it
remains true that the chief reliance of the "employee" must be free-
dom of choice among employers, unsatisfactory though it is, as in the
case of the patient and the doctors.
Given the principle of freedom, as active freedom of association, the
notion of scientific control of society is a palpable contradiction. (It
applies in varying degree in the treatment of defectives, young chil-
dren, and criminals.) For a dictator, the problem would be formally
parallel to that of scientific technology; but even in that case, the con-
tent of control would be utterly different. For, unless he could completely
drug or hypnotize and so eliminate the minds and wills of his subject-
slaves, the autocrat-proprietor of a society would have to rule through
those minds and wills. Hence the operation would employ such tech-
niques as persuasion or coercion, suggestion, cajolery, flattery, and,
above all, deception-which is at the heart of what is called "force”
in human relations—and also, inevitably, some real discussion. But
these things have no meaning for the relations between purposive
human beings and the inert objects of nature where scientific technique
is literally applicable. (The higher animals, notably in domestication,
present an intermediate situation which must here be ignored.) In a
democracy, the notion of control is not merely unethical, it is excluded,
ipso facto. The self-contradiction of a number of persons mutually pre-
dicting one another's behavior and acting on their predictions has
already been pointed out, and that of mutual control is even more ob-
viously absurd. The problem of democracy is to establish a consensus,
by genuine discussion, with intellectual appeal to super-individual
norms. Mere expression of individual desires is not discussion and can
only exacerbate conflict of interests and intensify the problem, not tend
toward solution in all-around agreement. Objective norms belong to a
third level of reality, distinct from and above individual desire or end-
and-means, as the category of the instrumental is different from and
"above" mechanical sequence or cause-and-effect. And judgments about
norms and ideals are affected by a different category of error, though
the facts, that norms are objects of desire, and that means-and-end
parallels cause-and-effect make clear analysis impossible.
Genuine "free" discussion is a difficult thing to deal with con-
ceptually, and more difficult to realize in practice. The problem pre-
sents two aspects: first, agreement on the range in which agreement
itself is considered necessary, as marked off from individual freedom
and diversity, and second, the specific content of uniformity in its
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:04:24 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
