2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
cities and of middle-class parents. Uniformity of examination systems
over wide areas involves wholesale discrimination against districts
which cannot attract the best teachers or command the best equip-
ment." But it was not the injustice to individuals of such discrimination
so much as the national loss that appalled him. "Any community," he
wrote, “has only a limited number capable of sustained mental effort.
. . . A democratic society can thrive only by the persistent search for
its greatest asset and by constant efforts to conserve, to encourage, to
train, and to extend it. . . . Universities must strive to enlist most active
energetic minds to train most active energetic minds."
Harold Innis graduated from McMaster University as a Bachelor
of Arts in 1916 and immediately enlisted as a signaller in the Fourth
Battery of the Canadian Field Artillery. He served overseas and was
wounded. He did not speak of these experiences but they were not for-
gotten. Years later, in an address to students on Armistice Day, 1933,
he said: "It has not been long since most of us have been awakened by
nightmares of intense shell-fire, and even now the military bands played
with such enthusiasm by young men are intolerable, and Armistice
Day celebrations are emotionally impossible." One suspects that the
cruelty of army life was an important influence in solidifying his belief
that the individual must be protected from the institution. Returning
to Canada, still partially disabled, he was determined to continue his
studies and determined that his field should be economics. He won his
M.A. degree at McMaster in 1918, and went on to Chicago for his
Ph.D. He was very fortunate in his choice of a graduate school for this
was a great period in the history of a great university. Our chairman,
Professor Chester Wright, was primarily responsible for his direction
but Clark, Knight, Millis, Moulton and Viner were among the pro-
fessors who stimulated, encouraged, and influenced him. Perhaps
equally important were the students with whom he worked: of these I
know he would have paid tribute to James Angell, Morris Copeland,
Carter Goodrich, Walter Smith, Miss Cleona Lewis and Miss Helen
Wright. His doctoral thesis, A History of the Canadian Pacific Railway,
was published in 1923.
Harold Innis was appointed to the staff of the University of Toronto
in 1920 as a lecturer in the department of political economy. In that
department he spent his whole professional career. In 1937 he became
the fifth head of the department in succession to W. J. Ashley, James
Mavor, R. M. MacIver and E. J. Urwick. He was, it will be noticed, the
first Canadian to hold that position. It is a department in which eco-
nomic theory and economic history, political theory and government,
sociology, and commerce are all included. The atmosphere of the
department makes for breadth; the mere specialist would find it un-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
