8
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
others he gave without measure or thought of return. His sense of
personal dignity was not largely developed, though his deep sense of
the integrity of freedom was unquestionable." To these I add my testi-
mony: This great scholar was a modest man with a great gift for
friendship. Hard as he worked he never seemed rushed but he always
had time to talk with his friends. He was a good listener; when he
spoke his words were few but pointed. His handwritten notes of con-
gratulations were treasured by those who received them. It was in an
atmosphere of friendship that his great moral and scholarly influence
was unobtrusively exercised.
University of Toronto
II
V. W. BLADEN
Arthur H. Cole observed recently that economic historians who
achieve the presidency of this Association are much more than economic
historians. Harold Innis like Edwin Gay was a man of wide interests and
stimulating mind. His influence extends far beyond his writings and
it would be unjust to him to stop with his written words. The following
observations are based quite as much on conversations with him as on his
published work; it is hoped that in this way some of the virtues of the
oral tradition which he esteemed so highly may be preserved even
though the written form win in the end.
It was perhaps inevitable that from the beginning Dr. Innis should
attack the problems of history on a broad front. Writing as a Canadian
economic historian he was constantly faced with the fact that in
Canadian development the strategic decisions, the shaping influences,
had always to be sought outside the country's political boundaries.
Study of an economy so vulnerable to external forces made the writing
of a national economic history out of the question. And there is the
fact, too, that this history is marked by the absence of any break with
European traditions, of alienation or turning back on the old world.
Much of Canada's economic history is simply an extension of European
economic history; only over the past century has it become an extension
of the economic history of the United States.
Study of this "international” economy of Canada led him early in his
work to the conclusion that ranking in importance and closely associ-
ated with economic influences and pulls were cultural influences and
pulls, and his interest in cultural relations is apparent long before he
turned from "staples" to "communications." In the shift of interest
from pre-occupation with the trade routes of commerce to the trade
routes of culture, from the exchange of staple commodities to the ex-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
