Education of the masses, and their instinctive reverence for the wis-
dom of their middle class leaders, those ornaments of society, would
thus insure that the democratic state would seldom stray far from the
public good. The argument meant that at the time the essay was writ-
ten the American government was a reliable instrument of public wel-
fare and 50 years later England's government would become so.5
It would be possible to document at length this proposition that the
classical economists objected chiefly to unwise governmental interven-
tion in economic life, but I shall give only two instructive examples.
The first example is provided by that fine Irish economist, Mounti-
fort Longfield. Apropos of certain dubious programs to assist the
laborer he wrote, "here Political Economy is merely a defensive sci-
ence, which attempts to prevent the injudicious interference of spec-
ulative legislation" [3, p. 18]. This sounds suitably conservative, but
let us continue. Years later, as a witness before a Royal Commission on
Railways, he complained that his timid fellow directors of the Great
Southern and Western Railway underestimated the long-run elasticity
of demand for rail service. To produce the necessary courage he pro-
posed that the government appoint a director with unlimited power to
vary the rates of each railroad, with the government taking half of any
resulting profits and compensating all of any resulting losses. Long-
field wanted not laissez faire but half fare.
The second example is the major controversy provoked by the cam-
paigns for the ten-hour day for women in factories, which reached suc-
cess in 1847. This was one of the first of the modern English interven-
tions in the contracts of competent adults, and it invited excommuni-
cation by the economic divines. This Factory Act was in fact opposed
with vigor by two important economists, Torrens and Senior, but ex-
plicitly not as a violation of natural right. Torrens prefaced his criti-
cism with a passage that reads better than it reasons:
The principle of non-interference can be applicable to those circum-
stances only, in which interference would be productive of mischief; in
* Mill's essay elicited a brilliant attack by Macaulay, who turned Mill's argument that
every man seeks only his own interests against the plea for universal suffrage:
That the property of the rich minority can be made subservient to the pleasures of
the poor majority will scarcely be denied. But Mr. Mill proposes to give the poor
majority power over the rich minority. Is it possible to doubt to what, on his own
principles, such an arrangement must lead?
The argument is carried to an interesting prediction: "As for America, we appeal to the
twentieth century," "Mill's Essay on Government," in Critical, Historical and Miscel-
laneous Essays (New York 1873), II, pp. 36-37, 40.
6
Royal Commission on Railways, Evidence and Papers Relating to Railways in Ireland
(1866), pp. 126-30, 359-60.