14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
There is nothing fixed or inevitable about the way in which collective
bargaining operates and the effects which it produces. I have in mind
a case where union policy has reduced output per man-hour over 40
per cent in seven years. I have in mind also a steel mill where the
president recently said that he would not sell his plan of union-
management coöperation for a million dollars. Such are the possible
extremes. Management has it within its power to influence greatly the
way in which collective bargaining operates. As managers become recon-
ciled to the necessity of dealing with trade unions, they may be expected
to be increasingly successful in gaining help on operating problems from
unions. The effect of collective bargaining upon the marginal efficiency
of capital will also depend upon the willingness of employers to or-
ganize. American employers have always been reluctant to organize
for the purpose of dealing with labor. Most of their existing bargaining
organizations are flimsy affairs with little discipline and meager re-
sources. The success of collective bargaining in Sweden and the United
Kingdom is largely attributable to the way in which the return on
capital has been protected by large and powerful organizations of
employers.
IX
The readiness with which an economy translates the results of
technological progress into new investment, the resistance which it
shows to depression, and the ease with which it recovers depend in
large measure upon the willingness of individual enterprises to increase
their expenditures for equipment and for the development of new prod-
ucts more or less regardless of the general business situation—to step
out in advance of other concerns and make commitments. In other
words, it depends upon the relative attractiveness of venturesome and
daring production plans in comparison with cautious production plans.
The dynamic influence of venturesome production plans has been
underrated in recent economic analysis, largely because the contagious
effect of investment by one firm in compelling offsetting investments by
rivals has received little attention.
The government, through the way in which it raises its money, has
wide discretion in determining the relative attractiveness of different
types of production plans. This is especially true when the government
power is no longer shifting. It is to be observed also that the large wage increases between
1936 and 1937, when the hourly earnings of factory workers increased by 12 per cent,
were not in the main directly produced by trade unions. In large measure they represented
an unsuccessful effort on the part of employers to stop the spread of labor unions. As a
matter of fact, the wage increases seem to have stimulated the growth of unions by con-
vincing the men that there was a lot of easy money around which they might get by
organizing. Some employers who gave a wage increase to prevent their men from
organizing had to give a second increase after the men had formed a union.
