24
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
places: “let me be master and you be slave"-which would be no im-
provement in the system. But such is the romantic view of God: one
who puts down the mighty from their seats and exalts the lowly, who
fills the poor with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. Well,
turn about may be fair play, but again we get no light on how to im-
prove the social order. Taking slavery or any institutional framework
as given, humane behavior is laudable. And that is exactly what our
religious ethic did, and does; it takes the established order of things
as given, in fact as divinely ordained: “Let every soul be subject unto
the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that
be are ordained of God" (Romans, 13:1). And of course this explicitly
included subservience of wives to their husbands. The only exception
recorded is the right of the propagandist of the “true faith” to preach,
in defiance of the authorities (Acts 5:29).
Again, as always (in accord with my theme) there is another side.
Liberalism can be equally naive and as given to empty words. No adult
in his right mind ever believed that men are born free and equal—
except for that complete and in that sense equal helplessness, for which
freedom is without meaning. The socialists and communists have called
religion the opiate of the masses, and in a broad historical sense that is
correct. But two other truths have not been so clear to either side in
the controversy. First; some pacifier, reconciler or escape was necessary
in a society that accepted the "static" philosophy of life that actually
was accepted everywhere prior to the "awakening" in Western Europe
in the 17th and 18th centuries. Then were born the ideas of freedom
and of progress in and through knowledge and intelligent action under
free cooperative association. For man is a romantic animal; and
until a people is prepared to make changes by intelligent agreement,
supernatural sanctions are required to make them accept what is estab-
lished and not criticize or try to change it. The second fact is that—
disregarding the question of how much intellectual maturity West-
European peoples had attained by the age of the Enlightenment—it is
certain on general grounds that the basic framework of social order
must always be accepted custom, interpreted and applied by agents
having a large amount of power. The possible amount and speed of
free and intelligent social change will always be quite narrowly limited.
This is particularly true if intelligent change is taken to mean change
in the direction of the ideals of justice and freedom, justice implying
some kind of fundamental equality-and other values generally ac-
cepted in our modern liberal world-view. As I would like to show at
greater length than is possible here, no close approach to realization of
those ideals is within the realm of possibility. Consequently, men will
always require, as a condition for maintaining any high civilization at
