of production. But this was a period in which off-farm employment was
easy to find and poultry production was expanding rapidly.*
A recent analysis of 47 relatively small cotton, corn, hog and cattle
farms in a small tributary watershed in western Tennessee by Fred
R. Robertson, then of the Tennessee Valley Authority staff, indicates
that these farms could increase their net annual earnings from well under
$1000 to nearly $3000, mostly by some combination of the following
fitted to each farm:
1. Raising the yields per acre of corn and cotton by fuller and better
use of fertilizer, by better adapted varieties or hybrids, by better control
of insects, and by using winter vetch as a green manure and cover
crop.
2. Establishing permanent pastures of white Dutch clover and fescue
on the bottom lands, and of sericia lespedeza and Bermuda grass
on the slopes.
3. Temporary summer pasture of sweet sudan grass and millet.
4. Winter grazing of crimson clover and winter oats.
5. Liberal liming and fertilization of pasture and hayland.
6. Larger herds of beef cattle and hogs to use the much larger
supplies of feed, forage, and pasture, and a few more dairy cows. This
is an area which is too far from cities to have a market for fluid milk.
7. Better quality of cattle and swine, two litters of pigs a year instead
of one, and better feeding.
8. Planting pine trees on about a sixth of the area, on land now idle
and grown up to weeds and poor grass. These pine stands are projected
to earn an average of $10 per acre per year over their fifty-year growth
cycle. The roughest land will be left in hardwood, and even under good
management will yield less than a dollar per acre per year.
These farms will still have incomes that are too low because they are
too small. The most rational way of enlarging them at the start is to
have the more promising of them buy out the smaller and weaker ones
and thus help these poor families to migrate to better opportunities.
Thus enlarged, the farms remaining will depend less on intensive handlabor
crops like cotton, and increase the amount of land and capital
goods used with each worker.
These Tennessee farms, however, are already diversified much more
than the usual cotton or tobacco farms in the South. It is not that these
farms normally need to reduce their acreages of cotton or tobacco.


#### Split:
*At the end of six years, 12 of these farms in one of the Vermont areas had increased
their net returns by a half, as against virtually no gain for 12 in an adjoining county,
matched very closely with them except that they received no planning guidance. Mimeograph,
R. H. Tremblay, University of Vermont.