ELLIS: THE ECONOMIC WAY OF THINKING
3
Is this just a peculiar form of words, which I propose? Could not
most of the decisions which I have labelled political and ethical, as well
as those more narrow economic choices, be embraced under a broader
and more flexible concept of things economic? Such an alternative
set of definitions would, indeed, be possible. But it would still be neces-
sary to give a distinctive designation to the study of free individual
choice in matters of production, a freedom which, as I have emphasized,
differs qualitatively and quantitatively from moral and political choices.
Thus the competing terminology would come out with the same sub-
stantive distinctions as my own, which has the decided advantage of
conforming to common understanding.
In describing economics as concerned with the processes and results
of individual free choice on the market, I differ significantly from the
description given by Lionel Robbins that economics deals with the
application of scarce resources to given ends.² Robbins' description
would, for example, include the analysis of productive effort to serve
the ends given arbitrarily-and let us say for present purposes, whimsi-
cally and sadistically-by an absolute dictator. But this is not econom-
ics. What makes resources “scarce"? And what determines their
"economic" application, if it is not the attitudes of individuals toward
supplying their services, and their own evaluations of products aside
from and independently of the dictates of authority, whether that
authority be "duly constituted" or not. Alternatively, one may express
the same idea by saying that Robbins' definition errs in accepting any
and all "given ends"; one end must be stipulated by economics itself,
and that is the freedom of the individual to make the best of his situa-
tion as a producer or consumer, so far as this does not entail greater
loss of freedom upon other individuals.
The individualistic predilection of economics does not, however, com-
mit economists to a laissez-faire, Manchestrian, or "reactionary" posi-
tion. Some decisions concerning economic problems have to be political,
for no one except an anarchist could deny that perfect freedom of
individual choice occasionally leads to results unacceptable to the com-
munity. Economists may thus range from extensive interventionists to
"hard boiled" liberals, according as they think these occasions to be
numerous or few. There are indeed strong grounds for supposing that
the occasions might be quite numerous merely for one reason alone-
that free individual choice is quite as likely to take the direction of an
effort to monopolize as to compete.
An individual or firm possessed of monopoly power does not always
press this advantage to the maximum, indeed frequently does not press
2 Lionel Robbins: Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science, 2nd ed.
(New York, 1935).
This content downloaded from 73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:02:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
