potential cropland or cropland and pasture in rotation. The net potential
addition to the then 478 millions of cropland was 245 million acres,
making a total of 723 million acres. Considerable of the 285 million
acres was cropland once, but has been abandoned so long that virtually
it is new land.
How much of this land will need to be improved and brought into
more intensive use, first, by 1975, and then in succeeding decades? This
will depend in part upon the demand for farm products at the time, both
domestic and foreign. In what follows, the same assumptions will be
made as in the P.M.P.C. analysis, except that the since-revised Census
Bureau forecast of 209.5 million will be substituted for the 193.5 millions
of population in 1975 assumed in the P.M.P.C. analysis. If gross
national product and disposable income increase at the same 54 per
cent rate per capita as assumed in the P.M.P.C. analysis, disposable
income will increase 110 per cent over 1950 instead of the P.M.P.C.
projected 96, and consumption of food and other farm products by 53
per cent instead of the P.M.P.C. 38 per cent.
A further important factor is that the increase in domestic demand
for farm products will be weighted considerably on the side of foods
of livestock origin. According to the revised P.M.P.C. analysis, there
will in 1975 be 38 per cent more persons eating 17 per cent more meat
per person and 30 per cent more poultry meat, and drinking 13 per cent
more milk, than in 1950. This will amount to a total increase of twothirds
in the consumption of these three products. On the other side of
the coin, total consumption of wheat, potatoes, and cotton were projected
to increase only one-third in spite of a 38 per cent increase in the
population. The increase in consumption of meat and milk in the past
few years has been offset a little by a further decline in butter consumption
since 1950, but probably will not be from now on. Consumption
of eggs and cheese is expected to increase at only about the average
rate for all foods. Over 6 times as many acres are required to produce
a given number of calories in the form of meat, dairy and poultry
products as in the form of foods for direct human consumption-cereal
foods, potatoes, sugar, etc.
As to prospects for demand abroad for U.S. farm products, the
P.M.P.C. report deals with this rather summarily, concluding that
exports will decline from 13 to 9 per cent of total farm output, and
that imports will rise from 10 to 15 per cent of the same base figure.
The decline of exports will arise from efforts of other countries to be
more self-sufficient in foods and fibres, and the increase in imports from
our peoples' wanting to buy more farm products abroad with their
larger incomes-more coffee, tea, fruits, nuts, etc. But agricultural surpluses
have become much more of a problem than they were when