at a fairly uniform rate; but the effective application of pure science
to practical and marketable products and the active creation and
exploiting of new markets in a private enterprise economy, as Schumpe-
ter has shown, awaits the discerning business venturer. Thereafter, the
perfecters and imitators crowd in, this particular market is gradually
pressed to the replacement demand stage, and the strong stimulus to
new investment ebbs away.
In a best of all possible worlds it might be possible to achieve com-
plete stability of production and a maximum rate of technical progress
at the same time. But if we take into account business optimism engen-
dered by the advent of some notable technological innovation such as,
for example, the automobile, and the spread of this stimulus to bankers,
family budget-makers, security traders, builders, exporters and im-
porters, and even to government spending authorities, we would not
be surprised to find the expansion running off into overly-full employ-
ment, inflation, bottlenecks, and wrong estimates, resulting in short-
ages in some sectors and overproduction elsewhere. So powerful are
these disequilibrating forces that to control them completely might
involve an intolerable degree of regimentation and might even stifle
the impulses toward economic progress. Consequently, we will probably
strike a compromise between continuous full employment and the most
rapid rate of progress by accepting some fluctuations, while striving
to keep them from developing into feverish speculative booms, followed
by disastrous and protracted periods of unemployment.
The concept of appropriate fluctuations may be regarded from the
angle of individual free choice. The history of business fluctuations
demonstrates that giving completely free rein to private decisions to
spend and invest will result in an intolerable degree of instability.
Marxians and contemporary communists confidently believe that
capitalism will one day be swept away in a catastrophic depression:
the only cure of instability is the totalitarian state. But this has not
been the diagnosis and prognosis of economics. Instability in the be-
havior of general aggregates such as the price level, spending, invest-
ment, and employment can be governed by similarly general measures―
monetary policy, fiscal policy, wage policy, and the like. Keynesian and
traditional economists alike reject the necessity of the piecemeal regula-
tion of business, industries, and occupations. Free choice is indeed
abridged by fiscal, monetary, and wage policy, but in impersonal and
nondiscriminatory ways. Thus in a quite understandable sense-since
unemployment and stagnant markets can scarcely be regarded as
things which anyone would freely elect—the policies designed to reduce
fluctuations to a tolerable or "appropriate" amplitude are also policies
maximizing the field of free choice over the long run.