14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
the security market's ability to stand pretty much on its own feet in
December 1951-with a minimum of support through open-market
operations and to stage a revival of rediscounting up to nearly a bil-
lion dollars, for the first time in eighteen years, and with no visible
signs of panic. These seem long steps toward a revival of a flexible in-
terest-rate policy, without which no general monetary control seems
to me possible.
One source of confusion still in our thinking is the distinction be-
tween the flexibility of interest rates and the level of rates. Many a
red herring has been drawn across this trail. When the emphasis was
greatest on fiscal policy and deficit financing in the late 'thirties, some
economists emphasized most the level of rates, and this emphasis has
persisted. One can trace it all the way from Keynes' "euthanasia of
the rentier" to some of the recent statements by the Council of Eco-
nomic Advisers. Keynes changed his mind, and almost the last time I
saw him was complaining that the easy money policy had been greatly
overdone and interest rates were too low both in England and here.
When I suggested that this was being done in his name, and that he
ought to write another book, he was much amused, and said he did
think he ought to keep one jump ahead.ยน What most interests me is not
the level of rates-the present level may well be the long-run average
-but the flexibility of rates. I cannot sympathize with the view that we
had better not alter rates because any upward shift might be perma-
nent, and that to avoid such a shift we should fight inflation entirely
by other means.
17
Despite, however, some recent steps in the right direction, the prob-
lem of coordinating debt management and monetary control still re-
mains a dilemma. We shall be at best for some time in the pioneering
stage, working under conditions for which earlier monetary theory and
policy provide little guidance. To pose the problem as merely one of
defining spheres of jurisdiction (though that is not unimportant) is to
16 One of Keynes' great virtues was that, despite his propensity to theorize, and to
project each new theory into universal time and space (which suggests the analogy of
the detective story writer who becomes absorbed in the internal consistency of his plot,
until he becomes absorbed in another plot), Keynes was ever sensitive to the changing
conditions of his time and country. Some of his postwar utterances in particular suggest
that in some fundamental respects he had come almost a full circle in his thinking. See,
for example, in addition to his changed views about the interest rate, his article on
"National Self-Sufficiency," Yale Review, Vol. XXII, Summer 1933, as contrasted with
the posthumous article on "The Balance of Payments of the United States," Economic
Journal, Vol. LVI, June 1946.
17 Including fiscal policy, direct monetary controls, and quite possibly other direct con-
trols. There is not space to deal with direct monetary controls, but I do favor their
permanent retention, as probably the most acceptable form of direct controls, and among
the most effective provided reasonable discretion is given to the monetary authority.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:07:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
