HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
3
congenial. For Harold Innis this was the right kind of department in
which to grow; for the department Harold Innis was pre-eminently the
right kind of head. The economic historian became the social scientist,
the social philosopher, the humanist. The strong historical tradition
begun by W. J. Ashley was renewed and strengthened; but he was alert
to the necessity of progress along theoretical lines too. It was this same
breadth of scholarly vision that made appropriate his appointment in
1947 as dean of the newly reorganized School of Graduate Studies, and
in 1951 as chairman of a President's Committee on the Humanities.
This task unfortunately was unfinished.
Harold Innis gave much thought to the rôle of the University and the
dangers that beset it. Its rôle, he believed, was crucial for western
civilization; anything that endangered it threatened that civilization.
He closed an address to a wartime Convocation at the University of
New Brunswick, after having been admitted to the degree of Doctor of
Laws, honoris causa, with these words:
As recent graduates, we dedicate ourselves afresh to the maintenance of
a tradition without which western culture disappears. We pay tribute to
the memory of those who fell in the last war, and of those who have fallen
in this war, by the ceremonies in which we have participated. These cere-
monies peculiar to an institution which has played the leading role in the
flowering of western culture remind us of the obligation of maintaining
traditions concerned with the search for truth for which men have laid
down and have been asked to lay down their lives.
At a similar ceremony at McMaster University he said: "You and I
have become today members of a community which in a very real
sense is the life of western civilization." The dangers came from those
who feared free inquiry, from the Church, the State, and from Business.
"Business and political exploitation of universities by bribes,” he said
in the address at McMaster, "reflects a complete inability to under-
stand that universities honour donors and not donors universities. The
impression that universities can be bought and sold, held by business
men and fostered by university administrators trained in playing for
the highest bid, is a reflection of the deterioration of western civiliza-
tion. To buy universities is to destroy them and with them the civiliza-
tion for which they stand." There were, however, more subtle dangers
within, especially related to the advance of science and the mechaniza-
tion of knowledge. In a paper entitled "A Plea for Time" he wrote
about the trend in universities to add courses because people like to
do them, because they will be useful to people after they graduate,
because members of the staff like to give them, and because an addi-
tional course means a larger department and a larger budget.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
