1943]
NOURSE: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THE COMMON INTEREST
7
race of destruction. Industrial and mercantile exploitation of the fac-
tory laborer and the farm worker gave us the labor union and the agri-
cultural coöperative. The labor union gave us the sympathetic strike,
the blanket wage contract, federal labor legislation, and the National
Labor Relations Board and similar control agencies. The local coöpera-
tive gave us the federated or centralized association, the "commodity
marketing" movement, the Federal Farm Board, and the Agricultural
Adjustment Administration.
The last step of both these series brings us to government control
along lines of class interest. Farm bloc and labor bloc appear to be
ready to give the workers in industry and agriculture a system of
implemented economic planning as soon as their clients say the word.
But before giving such a word the parties pause.
Today there are questionings among both the agrarian leaders and
the labor leaders whether they have not overshot their mark or whether
the tide on which they rode to power may not be about to engulf them.
Is it not possible that, in seeking the power of government to give them
boons that they cannot win for themselves through bona fide bargain-
ing, they have renounced their own right of self-determination and
become the wards of the provident state? Such an outcome has been
seen abroad. The widespread agricultural coöperative movement in
Russia was swept aside by the Soviet collective farm. The labor unions
of Germany lost their rights of self-determination and workers were
reduced to a servile status when Hitler accepted the task of ending
unemployment. Both labor unions and agricultural coöperatives so far
as they existed in Italy were reduced to robots of the fascist state.
The N.R.A. constituted a desperate move on the part of business
in the hour of commercial crisis to bring business in general under the
wing of government. In spite of their early withdrawal from that
alliance (or surrender), there is still a faction within the ranks of
business which looks longingly toward the comprehensive controls that
characterize the fascist state.
Before any of these interest groups make an irrevocable cession of
their great provinces of the free market economy to the suzerainty of
the political state, they should ponder carefully. Is it not possible to
utilize institutions and practices already experimentally developed in
private business and so perfect them as to bring personal values to
maximum expression and preserve desirable liberty of individual action,
but also facilitate necessary discipline and at the same time meet well
the requirements of advancing technology and of practical planfulness?
There is a tendency today even among economists to regard the ac-
tivities of organized groups in the business field as operating exclusively
toward curtailment of economic self-realization for the majority and to
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:54:27 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
