There is wide agreement about the major goals of economic policy:
high employment, stable prices, and rapid growth. There is less agree-
ment that these goals are mutually compatible or, among those who re-
gard them as incompatible, about the terms at which they can and
should be substituted for one another. There is least agreement about
the role that various instruments of policy can and should play in
achieving the several goals.
My topic for tonight is the role of one such instrument-monetary
policy. What can it contribute? And how should it be conducted to con-
tribute the most? Opinion on these questions has fluctuated widely. In
the first flush of enthusiasm about the newly created Federal Reserve
System, many observers attributed the relative stability of the 1920s to
the System's capacity for fine tuning-to apply an apt modern term. It
came to be widely believed that a new era had arrived in which busi-
ness cycles had been rendered obsolete by advances in monetary tech-
nology. This opinion was shared by economist and layman alike,
though, of course, there were some dissonant voices. The Great Con-
traction destroyed this naive attitude. Opinion swung to the other ex-
treme. Monetary policy was a string. You could pull on it to stop infla-
tion but you could not push on it to halt recession. You could lead a
horse to water but you could not make him drink. Such theory by
aphorism was soon replaced by Keynes' rigorous and sophisticated
analysis.
Keynes offered simultaneously an explanation for the presumed im-
potence of monetary policy to stem the depression, a nonmonetary in-
terpretation of the depression, and an alternative to monetary policy

####Footnote:

* Presidential address delivered at the Eightieth Annual Meeting of the American Eco-
nomic Association, Washington, D.C., December 29, 1967.
** I am indebted for helpful criticisms of earlier drafts to Armen Alchian, Gary Becker,
Martin Bronfenbrenner, Arthur F. Burns, Phillip Cagan, David D. Friedman, Lawrence
Harris, Harry G. Johnson, Homer Jones, Jerry Jordan, David Meiselman, Allan H.
Meltzer, Theodore W. Schultz, Anna J. Schwartz, Herbert Stein, George J. Stigler, and
James Tobin.
