changed, say, the cost of staff personnel and, hence, the cost of prestige
and other benefits that accrue from having a sizable staff, would the
marginal rates of substitution be adapted to the new cost relation. In
such a case we might also perhaps be able to tell the kind of response
of the decision-makers.

Alas, the condition that the marginal rates of substitution are independent
of the total funds available is not likely to be satisfied; in addition,
certain types of change in conditions have the bad habit of
affecting at the same time funds available and relative costs of utilifactors.
For example, an increase in the corporate income tax will change
the trade-off ratio between expensable outlays and profits in favor of
avoidable expenses.

Marginalism Extended: Choice of Maximanda

If we were interested only in a formal solution, and perhaps in a
proof of "existence" of an equilibrium position, we might be satisfied
with the maximization of total utility by those who effectively run the
firm. If, however, we want to predict the direction of the changes
which a given change in conditions is likely to bring about, then mere
formalism will not be enough. For predictive purposes we need more to
go by with the help of fewer variables. Maximization of money profits
is certainly the simplest "objective function," but it works only in the
case of firms exposed to vigorous competition. The management of a
firm that makes more than enough money need not go all out to maximize
profits; it can afford to do a few other things that it likes, such as
serving what by its own lights it regards as the national interest or indulging
in other luxuries.

Would this imply "giving up" the principle of marginalism in the
theory of the profitable firm? This is chiefly a semantic question. I
have been inclined to use a more extended definition. In 1946, I called
marginalism "the logical process of finding a maximum" [21, p. 519].
I did not say that it had to be maximization of money profitsthough
I struggled hard to justify the use of profit maximization in all
cases. In the meantime several writers have shown that profit maximization
may not be a completely unambiguous objective, even where
it is used in splendid isolation from all competing goals, in that it may
refuse to yield unambiguous conclusions regarding the effects of certain
changes, such as the effects of changes in profit taxes. In addition,
it has been shown that several workable “objective functions" can be
developed that give plausible results with a few relatively simple terms
added. Any of these functions that can be maximized, with or without
specific constraints, would still be a part of marginal analysis.
The choice of the maximandum is of course a pragmatic matter: we
should prefer one that yields sufficiently good approximations to what