industries; and it was also measurably characteristic of the policies
of credit control which resulted from the establishment of the Federal
Reserve System, despite the more direct relationship of such control to
the operation of the economy as a whole. But with the accumulation of
a vast mass of controls in course of the years, however miscellaneous
in character and lacking in coördination, most economists came to be
intimately concerned with a considerable variety of expressions of
public policy; and of more far-reaching importance, with the
assumption during the great depression of positive governmental
responsibilities, of diverse types, for increasing economic activity and
maintaining economic stability, virtually all economic inquiry came to
involve, and to be conditioned by, issues of public policy. This situation
has been further sustained by government domination of economic
activity during the war years; and on a more enduring basis, by the
well-nigh universally accepted objective of striving for sharply increased
production and employment and well-being, as compared with the
best of pre-war achievements, for the years that lie ahead. These more
recent phases of economic policy have ushered in important changes in
the kind as well as in the extent of relevant public controls. When
economists were chiefly preoccupied with cost-price factors, operating
in freely competitive markets, as means of achieving automatic guid-
ance of the utilization of resources and apportionment of income,
economic analysis could concern itself with policy matters only in an
incidental way; for in these circumstances public policy, except in
special situations, was merely directed to maintaining the framework
of private enterprise. But when, with depression and war, resort was
had to many direct controls, of positive bearing upon the development
of production and distribution, policy issues came to pervade the entire
field of economic investigation; and the far-reaching problems involved.
are being carried forward into the period of post-war readjustment.
For the past decade and a half economists have struggled intensively
with the inherent complexities and practical difficulties of economic
policy. They have played a necessary and important rôle in government
itself, and they are likely to continue to do so on a substantial scale.
Their influence, in and out of government service, may be fruitfully
exerted for both the relaxation and the extension of controls, depending
upon the specific character of prevailing and projected governmental
measures. It is of the very nature of public policy under democratic
institutions that it is fashioned out of a wide diversity of views, even
among experts; and in these circumstances large areas of disagreement,
involving in major degree conflicts of judgment rather than differences
as to fundamentals, are bound to persist. But most economists, repudiat-
ing with the vast majority of men and women the defeatist notion of the