1942]
SLICHTER: THE CONDITIONS OF EXPANSION
19
idle resources of all sorts. Although the tax expectations aroused by a
persistent use of deficits do not necessarily reduce the marginal effi-
ciency of capital, as a practical matter it is very difficult to prevent this
effect. There are also likely to be important differences in the economic
effects of public and private investment which prevent the former from
being merely an offset to the latter. Private investment, being intended
to yield a profit, represents an attempt to anticipate trends in consumer
demand and thus to keep the pattern of productive capacity adjusted to
the pattern of consumer demand.³
31 To the extent that this happens,
private investment tends to produce a rise in output and employment
rather than in prices. Public investment, on the other hand, does not as
a rule represent an attempt to adjust productive capacity to consumer
demand. Hence, if public spending occurs on a large scale after plant
is fairly well employed, its effect will be in the main to raise prices
rather than to increase employment. Consequently, the policy of com-
pensation seems to have a much narrower application than most of its
proponents have assumed.
The method of stimulation involves expenditures by the government
which are designed to produce favorable shifts in the private invest-
ment function. Expenditures on roads or air ports and, in some in-
stances at least, on rivers and harbors are an example, but the outlay
in fact may take a wide variety of forms. The support of agricultural or
industrial research is an example. Note that the efficacy of the method
of stimulation does not depend upon the expenditure's being financed
by borrowing. The essence of the method is that a public expenditure
(or loan) is creating a private investment opportunity which would
not otherwise exist. The method is not a new one, but it is susceptible
of considerable expansion.
XIII
This brief review of the possibilities of public policy leads one to the
conclusion that the range within which the government can influence the
level of employment is broad but, nevertheless, in a non-regimented
economy, limited. Given a fairly rapid rate of technological change, a
fairly even balance of power between employers and workers, and a
well-organized capital market, the community with the help of the
government may maintain a satisfactory level of employment. But we
cannot be sure. This brings us to the final and most basic consideration.
Both what the government needs to do and what the voters will permit
the government to do depend in the last analysis upon the valuations
31 How imperfectly even private investment accomplishes this result is indicated
by the jerkiness with which growth occurs. Partly because the pattern of productive
capacity does not accurately fit the pattern of consumer demand (and partly because of the
nature of costs), the economy during periods of expansion usually presents a mixture of
unemployment and inflation.
