a 2 per cent interest rate as the return on safe, long-time money, be-
cause the time has come when returns on pioneering capital can no
longer be unlimited as they were in the past" [4, p. 117].
In a book on Financing American Prosperity, edited by Paul Homan
and Fritz Machlup and published in 1945, Alvin Hansen devotes nine
pages of text to the "savings-investment problem" without finding any
need to use the words “interest rate” or any close facsimile thereto [5,
pp. 218-27]. In his contribution to this volume, Fritz Machlup wrote,
“Questions regarding the rate of interest, in particular regarding its
variation or its stability, may not be among the most vital problems of
the postwar economy, but they are certainly among the perplexing
ones" [5, p. 466]. In his contribution, John H. Williams-not only
professor at Harvard but also a long-time adviser to the New York
Federal Reserve Bank-wrote, "I can see no prospect of revival of a
general monetary control in the postwar period" [5, p. 383].
Another of the volumes dealing with postwar policy that appeared at
this time, Planning and Paying for Full Employment, was edited by
Abba P. Lerner and Frank D. Graham [6] and had contributors of all
shades of professional opinion-from Henry Simons and Frank Gra-
ham to Abba Lerner and Hans Neisser. Yet Albert Halasi, in his excel-
lent summary of the papers, was able to say, “Our contributors do not
discuss the question of money supply. . . . The contributors make no
special mention of credit policy to remedy actual depressions. . . . Infla-
tion. . . might be fought more effectively by raising interest rates. . . .
But other anti-inflationary measures are preferable" [6, pp.
23-24]. A Survey of Contemporary Economics, edited by Howard Ellis
and published in 1948, was an "official" attempt to codify the state of
economic thought of the time. In his contribution, Arthur Smithies
wrote, “In the field of compensatory action, I believe fiscal policy must
shoulder most of the load. Its chief rival, monetary policy, seems to be
disqualified on institutional grounds. This country appears to be com-
mitted to something like the present low level of interest rates on a
long-term basis” [1, p. 208].
•
•
These quotations suggest the flavor of professional thought some two
decades ago. If you wish to go further in this humbling inquiry,
I rec-
ommend that you compare the sections on money-when you can find
them in the Principles texts of the early postwar years with the
lengthy sections in the current crop even, or especially, when the early
and recent Principles are different editions of the same work.
The pendulum has swung far since then, if not all the way to the po-
sition of the late 1920s, at least much closer to that position than to the
position of 1945. There are of course many differences between then
and now, less in the potency attributed to monetary policy than in the