18
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
possibly declining supply of teachers of economics will result in increased.
salaries or in heavier teaching loads and more teaching by inadequately
prepared assistants can be answered certainly only in the future.
In addition to increased full time enrollments, economists are con-
fronted with increasing demands for their services in adult education.
Through part-time instruction, conferences, and lectures, immense num-
bers of adults are getting some instruction on economic subjects. It is
my view that responsibility for such teaching should not be shunted off
entirely on half-trained, young instructors-although their youth and
energy is a great asset in educational work of this type. Increased col-
lege enrollments, and growing demands in adult education, will add to
the teaching responsibilities of economists.
I make no claims to pedagogical wisdom. While I have been a teacher
for half of my adult life, I confess to some of the disdain which uni-
versity professors display towards the professional educational-methods
people without real justification, I will add. But my experience as a
university teacher and lecturer and as a civil service employee and an
appointed official has given me some ideas which I hope are worth ex-
pressing, in view of the large educational task which confronts the
economists in the period immediately ahead.
It has been said that the purpose of formal education-certainly of
higher education-is not to give people knowledge but to get them to
think. This is a truism, with which I, of course, agree. But I would add:
"Not only to think, but to read and observe." Students and, still more,
American adults read little that is not required or is not in picture or
capsule form. Even among people doing economic research, it is a com-
mon occurrence that they often display ignorance of what has been done
earlier on the subject. There may be a thrill in rediscovering independ-
ently what could be learned by reading, but it does seem a waste of time.
Without depreciating visual instruction-which has great merit in mass
education―I believe that it is sound counsel to urge upon all teachers
of economics to insist upon wide reading, in the training both of gradu-
ate and undergraduate students. It is through such insistence upon
reading that even when confronted with such large numbers of students
as we are, we may hope to be able to acquaint them with different
points of view and in the process stimulate thinking on the subject. Such
a method also has the advantage of keeping the professor on his toes,
which is essential for effective teaching.
Getting students to observe requires even greater skill on the part of
the instructor. It is a method, however, of enlivening classroom dis-
cussion, particularly if the observations are related to what is presented.
in the lectures, text, and readings. For graduate students it is most desir-
able in connection with reports and theses. In many branches of eco-
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:14:13 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
