the materialization of Sir William's forecast. J. S. Davis, having re-
viewed its basis and nonmaterialization, declared in 1932 that "the
specter of coming dearth of food is a ghost that deserves to be laid"
[13].
The shift in the bias of the resource base from organic to inorganic
facilitated a higher rate of development and some economy in trans-
port already near the beginning of the nineteenth century, if not ear-
lier. It did not become pronounced until later in the century, however.
Thus, between 1880 and 1937, while world population was growing
about two-thirds and its industrial production was almost sextupling,
world metal and fuel production increased 606 and 652 per cent, re-
spectively [14] [31, pp. 248-50]. The shift, however, added to the
fear of classical diminishing returns, the additional fear of mineral de-
pletion, analogue of soil-fertility depletion. Already in 1865 W. S. Jev-
ons forecasted that rising costs of coal attendant upon the working
out of the superior seams would depress British industry and trade
[19]. A quarter-century later, there arose even in the United States
concern respecting both soil depletion and unduly rapid mineral ex-
haustion. This concern contributed to the development of the conser-
vation movement later popularized by anti-Malthusian Theodore Roo-
sevelt.
2. Malthus as well as subsequent writers drew attention to the ex-
ternalities associated with population growth, many of them adverse. A
clear-cut distinction was not initially made, however, between exter-
nalities produced directly and externalities produced indirectly
through urban concentration. Malthus and his successors hoped to
control aggregate growth and thus minimize the impact of adverse ex-
ternalities through institutional and related controls of private origin,
that channeled costs and benefits to responsible and discretionary indi-
viduals and households. He had little confidence in Leviathan. In fact
J. S. Mill was almost alone in believing that under communism-albeit
small-scale communism rather than present-day bureaucratic socialistic
or mixed-economy collectivisms-the feedback system generative of
population-control would be much more effective than it was under non-
communism (Principles, II, i, 3) Concern regarding externalities asso-
ciated with urban growth became both more intense and more re-
search-oriented toward the close of the century. Even Marshall mani-
fested such concern [24].
3. In the wake of this growing awareness of externalities there de-
veloped interest in improvement of the quality of populations. While
few economists had the faith of a Helvetius or a Bentham in the ca-
pacity of education to eliminate inequality, not many attached to re-
productive selection the importance assigned it by F. Galton's follow-