2
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
For a time I had planned to try this evening to indicate in some
detail the kind of statement we ought to have for our free enterprise
way of organizing economic activity. But even an illustrative formula-
tion would have taken far too long and would have required my making
many points that are commonplaces for all of you along with less
familiar ones. Instead, therefore, I have decided to concentrate on
some of the leading public-policy implications that such a statement
would entail.
I
When we speak of a nation or community as having a free enter-
prise economic system, we imply by the word system that while there
is no general manager managing its economic activities, the people that
make up the nation or community in large measure act as if there were.
An adequate descriptive and explanatory statement for this kind of
economic system would call for taking at least the five following steps:
First, one should specify what general or central management functions
under such an arrangement are performed without a general manager.
Second, one should identify and describe the institutions that perform
these central management functions, for it is human institutions—not
an Unseen Hand-that serve in lieu of a general manager. Third, one
should explain how these institutions work, indicating the part played
by each institution in each function. Fourth, ore should consider any
deficiencies in the way the institutions perform the functions. And
fifth, one should note the public-policy implications of such deficiencies
and consider what institutional changes have improved or might im-
prove the performance of the functions. This fifth step would, of course,
give us only a part of the answer to the question, What public economic
policies should we adopt? But it is a significant part, because the func-
tions provide something like an objective basis for policy judgments.
Much of what I want to say relates to this part.
But what central management functions do institutions perform in
our economy? In the interests of brevity I will not attempt to enumerate
them systematically. There are four that are our immediate concern;
two others I will take note of presently. The four are: first, determining
how much of each good the economy is to produce; second, determining
who is to do what, and seeing that the work gets done; third, determin-
ing how and where the available nonhuman resources are used; and
fourth, determining the distribution of the economy's product. These
central management functions are all quite familiar. In fact they may
be said to be a primary concern of the principles-of-economics or model-
analysis type of statement of our free-enterprise system.
The list of institutions that participate in the performance of these
