intimate government-business collaboration. In the Netherlands, government,
business, and labor collaborate on a national wage policy
and government and business participate jointly in other aspects of
aggregative planning.
The relationship between government and business in the United
States can only be described as one of latent hostility which occasionally,
as in the past year, breaks out into rather more open hostility.
The traditional visitor from Mars becoming privy to significant.
domestic events of the last twelve months including the steel decision,
the behavior of the stock market, antitrust actions, and speeches of
various high government officials, would be hard put to it to explain
the bitterness expressed in many quarters. He could only conclude, I
believe, that these expressions arose from frustrations and resentments
lying deeper in the environment than the surface mirrored by these
events. A search for the source of these deeper manifestations leads
one, I would suppose, to consideration of certain obvious facts of
geography and physical environment, of the still undigested consequences
of the revolutionary change in the role of government brought
about by the events of the 1930's and the war, and going further back,
to consideration of the unique position attained by business in the
United States in the period after the Civil War.
What significance is to be attached to the fact that Washington is
a purely governmental city without industry and that the industrial
centers in the United States are generally far removed from this political
focus, I do not know. The fact that London and Paris are both
political and business centers no doubt helps to give the old school
tie greater scope than it would otherwise have. But the size and geographical
dispersion of our population would in any case prevent this
kind of concentration even if our business and political centers were one.
The dispersion, however, does not adequately explain what seems to
me a much sharper separation of elite groups, government, business,
professional, artistic, academic, etc. than one encounters in most Western
European countries. Despite the continuing rapid vertical social
mobility in the United States horizontal penetration appears to encounter
greater difficulties. Recently two outstanding businessmen
have commented on certain aspects of this phenomenon. Clarence
Randall has alleged that as business executives move up in the hierarchy
their circle of contacts narrows and that they tend to reach a
stage at the top where they talk only to themselves. A Bostonian
might be entitled to feel that this is even worse than talking only to
God. Ralph Lazarus has taken note of the suburban golden ghettos
in which well-to-do business and professional men preserve their
families from any contact with more sordid, but perhaps livelier ele-