Programs worked out by the Council must be so realistic and convincing,
so well thought out and adapted to the country's needs, so thorough
and so practical as to win acceptance, in whole or in large part, by the
President. His report to Congress, prepared in the light of the Council's
recommendations, would then be such as to enlist the support of public
opinion. Congress and the Executive should then stand together for the
enactment and administration of such laws and policies as the country's
needs demand.

There are in this possibilities of gradual but vital improvement in
our economic life. If the Reports become established as the recognized
authoritative basis of action-the recommendations would become binding
on all heads of government departments and agencies. There would
be less bickering, misunderstanding, and cross-purposes between
branches of the government. A Cabinet member or the head of an
agency would have the sole choice between supporting the program
adopted by the government or resigning.

The sound view that for an official on the Cabinet level the only
alternatives as a matter both of effective public policy and of personal
self-respect, is to coöperate or to resign has never been established in
this country. There is instead a dangerous practice of remaining in office
against one's convictions in order not to split the party, and an inclination
to refuse to quit under fire. These may be good rules of conduct,
when party loyalty or personal integrity is in question, but not when the
issue is one of national policy.

The ideal attitude of a Cabinet minister toward the Cabinet is described
by Viscount Grey in these significant words:

"

...

to put his mind into the common stock; to work sincerely in
matters of difference of opinion and difficulty for a Cabinet decision.
This does not mean that what is regarded by a minister as vital to the
public interest should be compromised. A minister should resign rather
than agree to that [italics supplied]. It means that a minister should not
press his personal views unduly about what is not essential, that he
should contend for substance not for form, that he should consider without
amour-propre how his own opinion can be reconciled with that of
others. Subject to the one qualification of not sacrificing what he regards
as vital to the public interest, he should not contend for victory,
but for agreement in the Cabinet.

"The other qualification is that of accepting full personal responsibility
for Cabinet decisions, when once agreed to."

This is a statement about a responsible Cabinet of the British type
by a distinguished member. Adoption of similar principles in an American
setting appears to be the only alternative to governmental fumbling.
A clear-cut administrative policy, with all the heads of government