empirical counterpart to the theoretical construct) is required, because
the explanation of changes in prices, inputs, and outputs is at the same
time an explanation of decisions of some particular firms, in the sense
of organizations of men acting in particular, sometimes unpredictable,
ways. Various attempts have been made to develop patterns of oligopo-
listic and monopolistic conduct and to correlate these patterns with
types of organization or with types of personalities exercising ultimate
decision-making power. The success has thus far been small; even if
the decision-making (say, pricing) in a particular firm was sometimes
satisfactorily modeled (for example, in a simulated computer pro-
gram), the model has usually not been transferable to other cases, to
predict decisions in other firms. I do not recall, moreover, that the be-
havior patterns in these cases were shown to be inconsistent with the
postulate of profit maximization.
Under these circumstances, retreat to simpler, less realistic models
of firms in oligopoly and monopoly positions is indicated. The first ap-
proach is to apply the polypolistic model, in full awareness that the ac-
tual facts are entirely different. In many instances the use of the po-
lypolistic model for situations which in our judgment would merit to
be labeled as oligopolistic will still yield satisfactory explanations and
predictions. Where this is not so, the analyst will resort to the use of
models of oligopolistic or monopolistic firms, postulating the simplest
possible pattern of action and reaction, dispensing with all peculiar at-
titudes and "special" strategies. Only where these simple models of oli-
gopolistic and monopolistic firms yield quite unsatisfactory predictions
will the analyst need to go further, to more special types of behavior,
provided he finds it worth while. It depends on the research interests
and on the problems under examination how much effort one wishes to
invest in behavioral research where the findings hold little promise of
yielding generalizations of wide applicability.
There are, however, some simple models of oligopolistic behavior.
tinuing shifts of position of competing oligopolists, and we have to turn to "the observa-
tion of facts," which would show us the variety of possibilities [29, pp. 601-2].
Schumpeter, in 1928, had this to say about the dichotomy: "We have much less reason
to expect that monopolists will . . . charge an equilibrium price than we have in the case
of perfect competition; for competing producers must charge it as a rule under penalty
of economic death, whilst monopolists, although having a motive to charge the monopo-
listic equilibrium price, are not forced to do so, but may be prevented from doing so by
other motives" [33, p. 371].
Finally, Scitovsky in 1951 stated that "not only does the monopolist's secure market
position enable him to relax his efforts of maximizing profit, but his very position may
prevent his aiming at maximum profit. He may regard his immunity from competition as
precarious or be afraid of unfavorable publicity and public censure; and for either reason,
he may judge it wiser to refrain from making full use of his monopoly position. We con-
clude, therefore, that although in some cases the monopolist will aim at maximizing his
profit . . . in other cases-which may well be the important ones he will refrain from
maximizing profit" [37, p. 377].