investment, production, and the market. The answer is that the expan-
sion process, based on saving and curtailment of consumer buying,
involves periodic overinvestment, overproduction, and underconsump-
tion, and hence the business depressions which it is certainly one
imperative task of private enterprise to eliminate.
Rejecting this line of theory, or oblivious to its long-run implica-
tions, nearly all business men and many economists hold that full
employment can be maintained only through continuous cumulative
saving and continual building of more capital plant. This is the phi-
losophy of expansion, faith in which we come by quite naturally.
Capitalism, the only system we have lived under, has had no experience
(save for depressions) with anything but expansion-increasing popu-
lation, new natural resources, and geographically expanding markets.
We take these conditions as matter-of-course, almost inherent in the
permanent order of things. But in the long view, they decidedly are
not permanent conditions. Those who hold that we are becoming a
"mature economy" have some pertinent facts on their side, although
I do not agree with them that the only way private enterprise can
operate in a mature economy is with the help of government spending
and deficit financing.
Highlighted by Mill's four fundamental propositions, the philosophy
of thrift and expansion was developed when British industry, on the
make, had unprecedented, and seemingly unending, opportunity for
expansion, and when, in consequence, there seemed no limit, ever, to
the need for additional investment funds. Orthodox economists held
that saving could not possibly impair consumer purchasing power.
Ignoring the rôle of money they were convinced that neither over-
saving nor overproduction was possible. Taking their particular era
of economic history as universal, they did just what we are doing
today: they assumed that expansion can go on forever.
Now, unquestionably, we can build more steel mills, to construct
more factories, to build more locomotives, to haul more trains-but,
somewhere along the line this house-that-Jack-built process has to
terminate, for all these capital instruments are merely accessories to
an increase in the final output of consumption goods. The philosophy
of expansion is a dangerous philosophy, for the simple reason that
expansion can not go on forever. Business policy based on such a
philosophy will work when expansion, as now, is essential. It will work
as long as expansion enough to absorb savings is possible; but viewed
in time perspective, it is in the nature of short-run temporizing, and
it is bound to lay up trouble sooner or later.
Parenthetically, I must note, too, that economists for whom I have
the greatest respect are, like many industrialists, enthusiastic about