sector. On any considerable scale, discussion itself must be organized;
and this organization presents practically the same problems as the
matter to be dealt with, specifically the limitation of freedom by rules.
and authority in order to secure the greatest possible freedom and the
performance of function.

The supreme and inestimable merit of the exchange mechanism is
that it enables a vast number of people to cooperate in the use of
means to achieve ends as far as their interests are mutual, without
arguing or in any way agreeing about either the ends or the methods
of achieving them. It is the "obvious and simple system of natural
liberty." The principle of freedom, where it is applicable, takes other
values out of the field of social action. In contrast, agreement on terms
of cooperation through discussion is hard and always threatens to become
impossible, even to degenerate into a fight, not merely the failure
of cooperation and loss of its advantages. The only agreement called for
in market relations is acceptance of the one essentially negative ethical
principle, that the units are not to prey upon one another through
coercion or fraud.

*

*

*

This picture of the open-market, free-enterprise organization must
sound very one-sided, and it is one-sided. Presumably, no competent
mind has ever believed in it exclusively. If there have been real
anarchists, they were not economists. And the society pictured by the
pure, idealized theory of the market economy is, or would be, one held
together by the single moral principle just stated. This is entirely
proper as a postulate for theoretical analysis at a certain stage of abstraction.
But the idea that freedom, or any single principle, contains
the solution, or the best solution, of social problems, is of course unrealistic,
and is directly contrary to the thesis of this paper, as stated at
the outset. Exaggeration of the significance of freedom, or overemphasis,
to the neglect of other principles, was the great error of the
liberal age, and is partly responsible for the reaction we now witness,
which threatens extinction of freedom and of all defensible values. It
should go without saying that freedom alone would not produce an
approximation to the conditions required for a market itself, the freest
possible market. And modern economists have not thought otherwise.
The accusation that Adam Smith, for example, believed in a universal
harmony of interests among men, is merely one discouraging example
of what passes widely in learned circles for history and discussion.
At a minimum, rules must be made and enforced by some agency representing
the whole market collectively; and the policing must be paid
for on a principle other than direct individual payment for service
received. And at most, as I have emphasized, the market deals only in
impersonal values. To realize its ideal character, the system would