14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
economists been affected by it. As the neoclassical economists recon-
ciled and refined the doctrines of the classical and utilitarian schools,
the doctrines gained in precision and validity of logic but lost in
relevance. So much so that Piero Sraffa as early as 1926 character-
ized current price theory as
essentially a pedagogic instrument, somewhat like the study of the
classics, and, unlike the study of the exact sciences and law, its purposes
are exclusively those of training the mind, for which reason it is hardly
apt to excite the passions of men, even academical men [27, pp. 535-
36].
In 1942 Joseph Schumpeter, commenting in a similar vein on the
proposition that under perfect competition the profit motive among
businessmen tends to maximize production, remarked that “in the
process of being more correctly stated and proved, the proposition lost
much of its content-it does emerge from the operation, to be sure,
but it emerges emaciated, barely alive" [24, p. 77].
The response of American economists to the far-reaching institu-
tional changes I have referred to was to reconstruct price theory to
make it more relevant to the structure and functioning of American
industry. Edward Chamberlin [11] tried systematically to revitalize it.
J. M. Clark [12], J. A. Schumpeter [24], E. G. Nourse [19], J. K. Gal-
braith [13], and others have in less comprehensive but equally sig-
nificant ways contributed to contemporary notions of how price is
determined and how it functions when large business units by reason
of their size or the differentiation of their products have power over
prices and output. Except for the contribution of Chamberlin, who
is interested in pure theory and approaches the price problem from
a highly abstract level, the most significant aspect of these contri-
butions to current economic thinking is that despite marked differences
in the details of their logic, they all find in the industrial structure
an institutional arrangement compatible with the effective function-
ing of the economy. And so do their many followers-the expounders
of the New Competition. Just as Smith in an age of individualism
regarded laissez-faire competition as an instrument for harmonizing
man's greed with the general welfare, so these economists have dis-
covered forces in the contemporary organization and structure of
industry that if left alone will promote the public welfare.
Clark is not disturbed by the contemporary industrial structure
because, despite its oligopolistic business units, he views potential
competition and the competition of substitutes as checks upon their
power, which, although not perfect, may result in long-run prices
that will closely approach those of pure competition. He also finds
