COPELAND: INSTITUTIONALISM AND WELFARE ECONOMICS
3
four functions is fairly long, so I will mention only two of them to
which I propose to give particular attention: the profit system and
competition.
Before considering these two institutions let me say a few words
about some shortcomings of the principles-of-economics or model-analy-
sis type of statement of our free enterprise system. For one thing it
largely ignores one of the main central-management functions, that of
establishing the master-servant relationships that make a business
organization possible. I want presently to comment on this function.
Another shortcoming of the model-analysis type of statement is that
it almost inevitably plays down historical changes and intercountry
differences in economic organization. The same "principles of eco-
nomics" are assumed to apply before and after the industrial revolu-
tion; the same “principles" to apply to all free enterprise countries.
A third major shortcoming is that a very inadequate basis is provided
for analyzing deficiencies in the way human institutions perform cen-
tral-management functions.
It is true the model-analysis type of statement of a free-enterprise
system gives full recognition to the imperfections in our economic or-
ganization arising from private monopoly. And at least since Keynes'
General Theory such statements have fully recognized the undesirable
consequences of an inadequate level of aggregate demand. But there
have been other serious deficiencies in the way our institutions have
performed central-management functions. One of the principal amend-
ments needed in the model-analysis type of statement is that the dis-
cussion of the four central-management functions with which it is
primarily concerned should include a more comprehensive and system-
atic treatment of these deficiencies and of any changes in institu-
tional arrangements that have served or might serve to remedy them.
More than a century ago John Stuart Mill in the last chapter of his
Principles incorporated a systematic treatment of the problems he saw
arising from the institutional deficiencies in the British economy of his
day and the measures that had been or could be taken to remedy them.¹
We very much need an amended and modernized vision of Mill's treat-
ment, for there are significant differences between that economy and
ours today. Also we have acquired in the meantime a good many signifi-
cant bits of economic knowledge that would be appropriate for bringing
his last chapter down to date either for the British economy or for ours.
Nonetheless no really comprehensive modern formulation along these
lines has been put together. It is true that in the decade or two before
1 J. S. Mill, Principles of Political Economy, Ashley ed. (New York, 1923), Book V,
Ch. 11.
