as to what the result will be. And all these symbolic relations are extremely
unstable and change unpredictably.
Since a fetish of “scientific method" in the study of society is one
of the two most pernicious forms of romantic folly that are current
among the educated, this theme ought to be developed at a length
which is impossible here. (The other "folly," which will receive more
attention presently, as my main theme, is the idea that devotion to
moral principles offers the solution of social problems.) "Science," in
the meaning of the natural sciences, can of course do something toward
both explaining and directing social events; and nothing is further
from my purpose here than any belittling of the importance of ethics.
What I insist upon is an understanding of the meaning and limitations
of simple or statable principles in both areas. In the naive form in
which both doctrines, scientism and moralism, are usually preached,
both are antithetical to the principle or ideal of freedom; they imply,
and if taken seriously would lead to, absolute authoritarianism. The
notion that evils are due to sin works out, as European history makes
clear, in having the right people (as shown by their being in power).
enforce their orthodoxy on all by burning or otherwise liquidating the
heretics, schismatics, and infidels, as occasion demands, though mainly
by effective indoctrination and conditioning for submissiveness before
the age of responsibility. The principle has merely been taken over
by the Marxists from historical ecclesiastical Christianity, with unimportant
changes in moral or political content, though with sweeping
but practically irrelevant change in the professed underlying metaphysic.
As to a "science" of human conduct, I have mentioned some
difficulties, notably that one of the most distinctive traits of man is
make-believe, hypocrisy, concealment, dissimulation, deception. He is
the clothes-wearing animal, but the false exterior he gives to his body
is nothing to that put on by his mind. My evangelist, Talleyrand, also
remarked that speech is the medium by which men disguise their
thoughts. The "real wants" or wishes, referred to before, run largely
in pairs of opposites; besides conformity and distinction we find
familiarity and novelty or fixity and change, adventure and security,
and so on. Mostly they have no specific content and anything that
happens or is done will fit one or the other of some pair. Such principles
cannot explain any concrete occurrence, the obvious weakness
of the "instincts" that were the groundwork of a "psychology" very
popular some years ago.
Another obstreperous feature of human phenomena is that men
have "attitudes" toward law as such, both descriptive and imperative
law, and both positive and negative attitudes. If there is a law, either