WILLIAMS: AN ECONOMIST'S CONFESSIONS
3
of economic thought. Eighteenth-century English economic thinking
had been relatively sterile before Adam Smith, the founder of classical
economics, produced his Wealth of Nations in 1776. That book, to
which I find an increasing inclination to return in the discussion of
some of our current problems, particularly those of international eco-
nomic growth, came after a long period of decay of mercantilistic doc-
trines. The question is not whether mercantilist theory was wrong in
some absolute sense. Indeed, in our time there has been a considerable
revival of some of its ideas. But it clearly lacked a “complex of suit-
abilities" for the environment of the eighteenth century, and before
Adam Smith there had been a long period of chipping it away. Smith
had had a succession of forerunners in such men as Hume, Locke,
North, Steuart, Petty, and Cantillon; he wove together the separate
strands of thought which he had found and in the process revealed for
the first time their full significance for the modern age.
The Wealth of Nations was, preeminently, the product not only
of the man but of the times. It was the product of the great economic
changes, which through their successive phases of geographical dis-
covery, colonization, and commercial and industrial revolution, were
sweeping away old doctrines, laws, and institutions-themselves the
products of their times-and creating the modern world. This close
relation of ideas and events is of course understandable and desirable.
There appears to be a fairly well defined pattern. Times change, old
ideas are undermined, the time span depending upon the importance
and the rapidity of economic change; and on occasion, when the time
is ripe, new leaders come forward to produce their "revolutions." Such
a process is not confined to economics but has characterized every
field of human inquiry. This is not the source of my unrest. In eco-
nomics, however, there have been some features of the process which
have left with me, since graduate student days, the abiding sense of
wonder, to which I referred earlier, about the progress of our thinking,
and particularly whether we are making some progress toward doing
the leading, or are merely being led on by events which, after the fact,
we seek to rationalize into some plausible pattern.
Adam Smith has been described as a great observer, and even as a
great thinker, but not as a great theorist. Baumol's very interesting re-
cent book on Economic Dynamics² begins with a chapter on “classical
dynamics." It makes not a single reference to Adam Smith, but gives
an excellent analysis of Ricardian economics. Yet surely Smith de-
serves a high place, and perhaps the highest, in any historical account
of dynamic economics. The point evidently is that, while Smith pro-
2 William J. Baumol, Economic Dynamics (New York, Macmillan, 1951).
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:07:12 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
