HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
skill and discipline are of little value unless the practitioners of good
works are selected for their integrity and the high quality of their charac-
ters.
7
Harold Innis was the recipient of many honours, which he bore
modestly, even apologetically. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal
Society of Canada in 1934 and became president of that Society in
1946. He was elected president of the Canadian Political Science
Association in 1937. In 1942 he was elected president of the Economic
History Association, succeeding Edwin F. Gay, the doyen of American
economic history. In 1944 he was awarded the Tyrrell Medal of the
Royal Society of Canada. In 1949 he was appointed Beit Lecturer in
Oxford University and Stamp Memorial Lecturer in the University
of London. Honorary degrees were conferred on him by the Univer-
sities of Glasgow, Laval, McMaster, Manitoba, and New Brunswick.
I should not leave with you this picture of the austere scholar with-
out a word about the man. Professor Donald Creighton, an intimate
friend over many years, described him in a broadcast of the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation:
The tall, slight figure, the unruly plume of hair, the genially sardonic
smile were well known and well loved throughout Canada. To a whole
host of admirers and disciples, he will be remembered not as a row of
books, only partly personified, but as the most companionable and inter-
esting of men. Nobody could relax more completely and wholeheartedly
than this austere and tireless scholar: nobody ever got more interest
and amusement out of a few minutes' chat, or an hour's gossipy con-
versation, or a long evening's talk ranging cheerfully and haphazardly
over a great variety of books, and people, and places. He will be pleasantly
remembered as he was on these occasions-sitting usually in a straight-
backed uncushioned chair, tilting himself back occasionally and occasion-
ally emphasizing a point in the argument with an awkward but expressive
gesture of his long, strong hand. His study became a kind of clearing-
house for the academic gossip of a large part of the English-speaking
world. He had a great fund of stories, for men told their best anecdotes
in his presence, and his own humour was rich, and generous, yet delight-
fully astringent. He was master of jocular irony and sly understatement.
He could be sardonically funny at the expense of pretence, and pomposity,
and complacence, particularly when they were cushioned in fatty deposits
of wealth or position. He was good company-urbane, entertaining,
stimulating.
Mr. George Ferguson, another of his intimates, described "the relaxed,
genial man whose entry into a room intensified the quality and gaiety
of the day. He laughed easily, deep laughs from his heart, and he loved
other men's humor. His own was rich and sardonic. The help he gave
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
