have the statistical information which would permit them to approximate
the production function, the elasticities of the marginal productivity
curves, or to determine the degree to which the actual
distribution of the product conforms to what one would expect from
the nature of the production function itself. But the sad truth of
the matter is that they have made little effort to find out and have
instead turned their backs upon inductive research and have, in effect,
been school men living within ivy-clad towers.

II. The Early Studies of the Cobb-Douglas Production Function
It was twenty years ago last spring that, having computed indexes
for American manufacturing of the numbers of workers employed by
years from 1899 to 1922, as well as indexes of the amounts of fixed
capital in manufacturing deflated to dollars of approximately constant
purchasing power, and then plotting these on a log scale together with
the Day index of physical production for manufacturing, I observed
that the product curve lay consistently between the two curves for the
factors of production and tended to be approximately a quarter of the
relative distance between the curve of the index for labor, which
showed the least increase over the period, and that of the index for
capital which showed the most. Since I was lecturing at Amherst
College at the time, I suggested to my friend, Charles W. Cobb, that
we seek to develop a formula which would measure the relative effect
of labor and capital upon product during this period. We were both
familiar with the Wicksteed analysis and Cobb was, of course, well
versed in the history of the Euler theorem. At his suggestion, therefore,
the sum of the exponents was tentatively made equal to unity in the
formula

P = bLk C¹-k

(1)

Here it was only necessary to find the values of b and k. This was
done by the method of least squares and the value of k was found to
be .75. This was almost precisely what we had expected because of
the relative distance of the product curve from those of the two factors.
The value of the capital exponent, or 1-k, was, of course, then taken
as .25. Using these values, we then computed indexes of what we
would theoretically have expected the product to be in each of the
years had it conformed precisely to the formula. We found that the
divergencies between the actual and theoretical product were not
great since in only one year did they amount to more than 11 per cent,
and that except for two years, the deviation of the differences was precisely
what we would expect from the imperfect nature of the indexes
of capital and labor. Since our index of capital measured the quantities