14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
starting a consultant job to pick university presidents ought to be put into
effect immediately.
In Canada, university presidents are in the habit of talking about the Arts
courses, and at intervals of four or five years pulling the whole structure
out by the roots, and looking at them, and then replanting them and
wondering why they don't flourish. If a university president would con-
centrate on the very important job of making appointments and defending
them after they are made, the Arts courses might have a chance, but
apparently that is not enough and they must spend their time setting
a bad example by tinkering with courses.
I have been tempted to write a blast suggesting the inevitable defeat of
American policy partly based on the problem of language and propaganda.
It proved impossible for Germany, as it will prove impossible for any
group, to penetrate the Russian language. But there are many other
factors. I do not believe that American self-confidence is sufficient to
admit of wise delayed moves. The interest in propaganda defeats a
masterly waiting policy, and no people can be great unless they learn
when not to do things and when to do them and to have the self-confi-
dence enabling them to make decisions in their own way and in their own
time. The Romans and the British to some extent learned this.
I think there are dangers in the pretensions of precision. A friend of mine
has been described as more anxious to be precise than accurate, and I
suspect that we are in danger of this general disease in the social sciences.
As Frank Knight put it, we deal in the averages of estimates and these
are not very precise. But I am afraid we deal also in specific measure-
ments and are greatly attracted to things which can be specifically
measured. For all this, of course, there is a very important place, but it
is a limited place, and its limits ought to be very carefully studied.
I keep coming back to my own particular interests in what I laughingly
call "research," namely, the persistent tendency in the field of knowledge
and in the social sciences to build up monopoly or oligopoly situations.
The literature builds up around the name of Keynes, or Marx, or some-
one else, and everything else is dropped. A situation responsible for these
tendencies is dangerous and comes a little short of dictatorship; that is,
the difference between oligopoly and monopoly is not much, but it is
important. What I am wondering about is whether we can reach a position
in which there is continuous discussion of vital problems. Problems cease
when they become unmanageable or monopolies. And this is why I would
like to see the drift toward the humanities—namely, to recognize the
intensive work which has been done over the centuries and not so com-
pletely ignore it as is now done, or to put it in the form of first-year
survey courses, which is probably worse. Such a drift might do something
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
