BLACK: AGRICULTURE IN THE NATION'S ECONOMY
43
This strange alliance may be able to get rigid price legislation passed
by both houses of Congress in the coming session. For the President
not to veto it would be a surrender to political expediency, but he will
be under tremendous pressure not to do so by many members of Con-
gress wanting to be re-elected in the agricultural districts.
Of course we cannot really be sure how farm people will vote on
this issue. It depends in good measure on how much they come to
understand the issue in the next ten months. Significant in this connec-
tion is a survey made by Dale Hathaway, then of Michigan State
College, now on the staff of the Council of Economic Advisors, in
several counties in that state. First he asked the farmers a series of
questions designed to test their knowledge and understanding of the
price-support program. Then he asked questions designed to ascertain
whether they were for it or against it. Scarcely one-third of them
passed the test, and these were preponderantly opposed to the program.
The two-thirds who failed the test were preponderantly for it.
No doubt a sizable fraction of the farmers of this country realize
pretty well that our government cannot keep on supporting prices at a
level that brings forth growing surpluses. But many of these will say
if asked, "Labor is grabbing all it can get. Business always has been
able to get pretty much what is wants. If we farmers don't grab the
same way, we are being silly."
In this confused situation, there is a fair chance that rigid 90 per
cent price supports will be voted on in either 1956 or 1957. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture which has the task of administering such
an Act will be in a worse spot than the present Department of Agri-
culture is now. It will be dramatic injustice if it is not a Democratic
administration that has to take on this task. Such a course of events
will simply mean that bad as things seem now, they will have to get
worse before the rank and file of the people of our nation sense the
situation well enough to take the necessary action. The party in power
at the time they sense it will lose a good deal of standing with the
general public in the ensuing five or ten years.
As for the final outcome, we need have small fear. But as a nation
we will be better off and less distraught in the next five years if such
a program of action as outlined in Section IV can be set forth upon
even as early as in the coming Congress.
It should be evident by this time that the education in the public
affairs of agriculture that is needed in order to obtain constructive
action without too long delay must not be limited to farm people. The
other 86.5 per cent-before long 90 per cent or more-need an under-
standing of these affairs to. They will at times need to come to the
rescue of agriculture. This coming Congress and election may be such
a time.
