farming territory will suffer a severe loss in business if farm prices
fall off a fifth. The farm families may have no money at all with which
to buy durable consumer goods and farm machinery. A city with
manufacture of farm machinery as its major industry may be equally
hard hit. But the steel manufacturing industry of Pittsburgh will suffer
only that fraction of its total output that is used in farm machinery,
trucks, and automobiles not bought by farmers because of their loss.
of income. In 1955, such loss has been much more than offset by expansion
in other lines.

IV. Problems, Policies and Programs

By now, we should have laid a sufficient foundation for considering
what needs to be done about the nation's agriculture. This will be
undertaken under three heads: first, the emergency phase-this nation
really has got itself into a jam so far as its agriculture is concerned and
must take some vigorous emergency actions; second, the short-run
phase, a ten-year program designed to get agriculture into balance with
the rest of the nation's economy and the world; and finally, the longerrun
phase-a program designed to keep it in this balance. Of course
these are not steps or stages following each other. They need to be
integrated and reconciled with each other from the start.
Again, even in this section, the treatment will be nonpolitical.
Of course the overwhelming reason that the 86.5 per cent of the
people of this country who do not live on farms should want to help
those who do is that the people who live on farms are part of this
country and should live as well and happily as the rest of us. Our
analysis has demonstrated that, considered as one group, they are not
doing this, even after the publicity released statistics are needfully
supplemented. Moreover, the income to agriculture has declined about
one fifth per farm and per farm worker since 1951 while nonfarm income
is continuing its strong advance.

But another powerful reason that the 86.5 per cent of the nonfarm
folks should be concerned is that they and the 13.5 per cent of farm
folks are each importantly dependent on the other. The nature of this
interdependence needs to be stated more definitely than anywhere in
this paper so far. First of all, this interdependence is primarily not a
short-run one associated with the ups and downs of business cycles.
The interdependence so far as business cycles are concerned is mainly
one-way of agriculture upon the rest of the economy to keep fully
going so that the demand for farm products will not fall off sharply.
The short-run interdependence of agriculture and the rest of the economy
is centered upon war and defense. Agriculture must be prepared
to increase its output rapidly, particularly in these days of world wars.