Also, it still remains to be seen whether the rising trend of prices—to
say nothing of the rapidly growing consumer and mortgage debt-may
not serve to complicate future recessions.
A generation ago many economists, having become persuaded that
our economy had reached maturity, spoke grimly of a future of secular
stagnation. Parts of their analysis were faulty and their predictions
have proved wrong; yet their warning helped to mobilize thought and
energy to avert the danger of chronic unemployment. Of late, many
economists have been speaking just as persuasively, though not always
as grimly, of a future of secular inflation. The warning is timely. During
the postwar recessions the average level of prices in wholesale and
consumer markets has declined little or not at all. The advances in
prices that customarily occur during periods of business expansion have
therefore become cumulative. It is true that in the last few years the
federal government has made some progress in dealing with inflation.
Nevertheless, wages and prices rose appreciably even during the recent
recession, the general public has been speculating on a larger scale in
common stocks, long-term interest rates have risen very sharply since
mid-1958, and the yield on stocks relative to bonds has become abnormally
low. All these appear to be symptoms of a continuation of inflationary
expectations or pressures.
Such developments have often led to economic trouble. They could
do so again even if our balance of payments on international account
remained favorable. That, however, has not been the case for some
time. The "dollar shortage" which influenced much of our economic
thinking and practice during the past generation seems to have ended.
The economies of many areas of the Free World, especially of Western
Europe and Japan, have lately been rebuilt and their competitive power
has been restored. This re-establishment of competitive and monetary
links between our country and others may cause us some inconvenience,
but it is basically a promising development for the future. It should
stimulate our economic growth as well as contribute to the economic
progress and political stability of other nations of the Free World. Our
financial policies, however, will gradually need to be adjusted to the
changed international environment. Although our gold stocks are still
abundant and the dollar is still the strongest currency in the world, we
can no longer conduct our economic affairs without being mindful of
gold, or of the short-term balances that foreign governments and citizens
have accumulated here, or of the levels of labor costs, interest rates,
and prices in our country relative to those in other nations. Unless the
deficit in our balance of payments is soon brought under better control,
our nation's ability to pursue contracyclical policies during a business
recession may be seriously hampered.