it will be like a space vehicle that has taken a fix on the wrong star. No
matter how sensitive and sophisticated its guiding apparatus, the space
vehicle will go astray. And so will the monetary authority. Of the various
alternative magnitudes that it can control, the most appealing
guides for policy are exchange rates, the price level as defined by some
index, and the quantity of a monetary total-currency plus adjusted
demand deposits, or this total plus commercial bank time deposits, or a
still broader total.
For the United States in particular, exchange rates are an undesirable
guide. It might be worth requiring the bulk of the economy to adjust
to the tiny percentage consisting of foreign trade if that would
guarantee freedom from monetary irresponsibility-as it might under a
real gold standard. But it is hardly worth doing so simply to adapt to
the average of whatever policies monetary authorities in the rest of the
world adopt. Far better to let the market, through floating exchange
rates, adjust to world conditions the 5 per cent or so of our resources
devoted to international trade while reserving monetary policy to promote
the effective use of the 95 per cent.
Of the three guides listed, the price level is clearly the most important
in its own right. Other things the same, it would be much the best
of the alternatives—as so many distinguished economists have urged in
the past. But other things are not the same. The link between the policy
actions of the monetary authority and the price level, while unquestionably
present, is more indirect than the link between the policy actions
of the authority and any of the several monetary totals. Moreover,
monetary action takes a longer time to affect the price level than
to affect the monetary totals and both the time lag and the magnitude
of effect vary with circumstances. As a result, we cannot predict at all
accurately just what effect a particular monetary action will have on
the price level and, equally important, just when it will have that effect.
Attempting to control directly the price level is therefore likely to make
monetary policy itself a source of economic disturbance because of
false stops and starts. Perhaps, as our understanding of monetary phenomena
advances, the situation will change. But at the present stage of
our understanding, the long way around seems the surer way to our objective.
Accordingly, I believe that a monetary total is the best currently
available immediate guide or criterion for monetary policy-and
I believe that it matters much less which particular total is chosen than
that one be chosen.
A second requirement for monetary policy is that the monetary authority
avoid sharp swings in policy. In the past, monetary authorities
have on occasion moved in the wrong direction-as in the episode of
the Great Contraction that I have stressed. More frequently, they have