ments, without serving notice upon the intellectual consumer of these
maxima. Because the concepts of maximum or optimum in the economic
literature of the "scientific period" since Adam Smith dealt with free
market decisions, and because economists and the public have become
thoroughly habituated to this connotation, the danger is great that the
newer concepts will be accepted with an unawareness of their ulterior
meanings. Thus Sir William Beveridge's "social priorities” really in-
volve political and authoritarian ethical decisions, though the reader is
not warned of this fact and the “free society" part of the title of his
book would rather strongly suggest free individual choice.
The central emphasis of my reasoning, however, has not been put
upon this more or less ideological pitfall but upon real events. The body
of economic analysis has been built up upon the ultimate facts of scar-
city, cost, and the satisfaction of human wants, and cost and utility do
not reveal themselves except in the choices of individual persons. The
larger the group for whom the choice is made vicariously by moral or
political authority, the greater is the probable divergence of these
vicarious choices from what the people would themselves have elected,
which generally goes under the caption of "marginalism" in theoretical
terms.
No society can be operated merely on the basis of free individual
choice in the markets, for there are conspicuous cases, such as monopoly,
cyclical variations, ignorance, perverted tastes, fraud, incapacity to pro-
duce enough for a living, and many more, requiring political interven-
tion. As populations increase and techniques become more involved,
necessary controls seem to become more numerous. And yet this does not
and cannot deny that man, and indeed individual man, remains the
measure of all things: wants are personal and effort is personal. Is it not
profoundly significant that the authors of the outstanding and pioneer-
ing work On the Economic Theory of Socialism, the one, Professor F.
M. Taylor, a staunch liberal, and the other Oscar Lange, a socialist,
have based the entire structure upon consumer free choice of expendi-
ture and producer free choice of occupation? Lange's socialism con-
sisted essentially of state ownership of productive property and of the
enforcement of freedom of consumer and producer choice. With regard
specifically to any "preference scale imposed by bureaucrats," let it be
noted that it was Lange who wrote: "Such a system would scarcely be
tolerated by any civilized people."10 I would myself prefer to say more
cautiously that if the preference scale is "imposed by bureaucrats,'
economics has long since been silenced. The only type of socialism
"


#### Split:
Sir William Beveridge, Full Employment in a Free Society (New York, 1945).
10 Oscar Lange and Fred M. Taylor, On the Economic Theory of Socialism (Minne-
apolis, 1938), p. 95.