stickier than unregulated prices? The empirical answers would obviously
have contributed both to public policy and to the development
of a general theory of public and private economy.
Here we must pause, not without embarrassment, to notice that we
could ask for empirical studies in areas traditional to economics as well
as in the netherland of half economics, half political science. We need
not be surprised, I suppose, that we know little of the effects of state
regulation, when we also know very little about how oligopolists behave.
Marshall's theory that the differences between short- and longrun
prices and profits are regulated by the differences between short- and
long-run reactions of supply will be 75 years old next year. Despite its
immense influence, this theory has yet to receive a full empirical test.
If such basic components of modern economic theory have escaped
tests for quantitative significance, it is hardly surprising that our antitrust
laws, our motor carrier regulation, and our control of insurance
company investments have also escaped such tests.
Still, there has been a difference. Empirical tests of economic
theories have been made for generations, and with greater frequency
and diligence than we encounter in the area of social experiments. Already
in 1863 Jevons had ascertained the serious fall in the value of
gold consequent upon the Californian and Australian gold discoveries—
it was 26 per cent over the 13-year period, 1849-62. No such
diligence or ingenuity can be found in the study of state controls at
that time. A half century later Henry Moore was calculating statistical
demand curves; again the study of the effects of public policies was
lagging.
The age of quantification is now full upon us. We are now armed
with a bulging arsenal of techniques of quantitative analysis, and of
a power-as compared to untrained common sense-comparable to
the displacement of archers by cannon. But this is much less a cause
than a consequence of a more basic development: the desire to measure
economic phenomena is now in the ascendant. It is becoming the basic
article of work as well as of faith of the modern economist that at a
minimum one must establish orders of magnitude, and preferably one
should ascertain the actual shapes of economic functions with tolerable
accuracy.
The growth of empirical estimation of economic relationships, please
notice, did not come as a response to the assault on formal theory by
the German Historical School, nor was it a reply to the denunciations
of theory by the American Institutionalists. It has been a slow development,
contributed to by an earlier development in some natural sciences
but mostly by the demonstrated successes of the pioneers of the
quantitative method-the Jevons, the Mitchells, the Moores, the
Fishers.