BLACK: AGRICULTURE IN THE NATION'S ECONOMY
19
lier. Recent potato yields are 70 per cent above those of around ten
years before; recent corn yields a fourth higher. In particular special-
ized areas, the yields may have doubled in ten years; for example, po-
tatoes in Aroostock County, Maine. In none of these cases has a large
expanding market been available. The increased efficiency in broiler
production, however, has been favored with a rapidly expanding mar-
ket, and thus with more than a five-fold increase in output since 1940.
But when these amazing gains are averaged in with the vast bulk of
total agricultural output, only under exceptional circumstances such as
since 1940 is the rate of output gain accelerated much.
To illustrate the foregoing, consider the possible impact of the de-
velopment of nuclear energy upon agriculture. Until such time as this
can be used advantageously in place of fuel oil in farm machines, its
impacts will be principally a speeding up of the process of developing
improved varieties and hybrids of plants and of control of pests on
the farm and of infestation and spoilage of products in storage. This
speeding up will intensify the "surplus problem" and make it the more
necessary to develop and use a realistic procedure of adjustment of
agricultural production to the market. But it will not turn agriculture
upside down.
First as to the population base for this longer future. It seems most
rational to expect that rates of population increase in our own country
will slacken gradually, but not, except for some new development, get
back to the levels of the depression 1930's. The arts of agricultural
production and development of our land resources will, however, be able
to advance fast enough to permit a steady rise in the level of food
consumption in the country, and also of clothing as far as the cotton
part of it is concerned. This does not mean that over the longer pull
the prices of farm products may not advance more than prices in gen-
eral, as indeed they have over the long-run past. If they do, it will be
because agricultural land resources are after all somewhat limited, and
basic science and its applications may not, as was true in the past
century, make as much progress in agriculture as outside of it. But re-
sults of this kind will probably not appear much before the end of the
twentieth century. What we may get instead is periods of perhaps a
decade long when agriculture slackens its advance too much and prices
are too high, in reaction to having advanced too fast for a while, with
surpluses and too low prices in consequence, as perhaps in the last
few years.
The foregoing is solely in terms of food and cotton and population
considered for the United States as if it were isolated from the world.
What about the larger needs and demands for our farm products in
other parts of the world? The answer to this question so far as the
