tions were, of course, almost totally absent, and so were other quantitative
trade restrictions such as quotas and export or import monopolies.
We are thus justified, it seems to me, to speak of a long period of
world-wide integration during which most countries were knit together
ever more closely in a network of multilateral trade and payments.
It is true that many writers-most of them later with the
benefit of hindsight, though one can also find a few contemporary
prophets of doom-thought that they could detect tendencies of incipient
disequilibrium and distintegration. As far as the economics of the
matter is concerned, these are merely ex post rationalizations and explanations
of what happened later. It is only in the field of ideologies, it
seems to me, that a case can be made for the theory that later events
were the likely and natural (though not the unavoidable) consequence of
earlier tendencies. Concretely, it can perhaps be argued that the rising
tide of economic and political nationalism and antiliberal thinking and
policies in general led to World War I and its aftermath. But there
surely was no inevitable economic nexus in the sense that a deep-seated
real maladjustment had arisen in the world economy, something analogous
to what is supposed by many business cycle theorists to develop
in major if not all business cycle upswings- a real disequilibrium
which makes a painful and long drawn out readjustment all but inevitable.

The statement that there was nothing basically wrong with the pre-
1914 world economy will probably not encounter strenuous objections
from the present generation of economists, although it is contradictary
to Marxian-type theories, especially the neo-Marxian theory of imperialism,
and to the Keynesian secular stagnation doctrine.
But the justification of what I have said must to a large extent rest on
the plausibility of an alternative explanation of the events of the next
thirty years.
IV. Disintegration of the World Economy, 1914-45
The period from 1914 to 1945, bordered by two world wars and
bisected by a catastrophic depression, can surely be described as one
of distintegration of the world economy and declining world trade,
under any reasonable definition of these terms.
The disintegrating forces were so strong that it is surprising that
world trade did expand at all. Let me briefly recall the major developments.

World War I was followed by acute financial disorders, rapid inflation
in many countries and hyperinflations in some. In the United
States, the period of inflation ended in the severe depression of 1920-21
which had repercussions in many countries around the world, while in