arrangements and practices, air pollution, stream pollution, soil erosion,
spring floods and fall droughts, and uses of real estate in ways
that adversely affect the value of nearby properties.
5. Eminent domain. As Richard T. Ely emphasized, there are under
existing property rights some types of project that, though definitely
in the public interest, it has not been profitable for a private enterprise
to undertake without the aid of a delegated right of eminent domain.
Projects such as constructing a railroad or a canal or damming up a
stream are cases in point.

6

6. Corporation management. The financiers and officers of a corporation
have often found ways to make money for themselves that have
had the effect of taking money out of the pockets of the corporation's
stockholders. High finance has been a source of many large fortunes.
Thorstein Veblen was by no means the first economist to give attention
to this peculiarly lucrative form of pecuniary employment, but the
penetrating analysis he gave it surely deserves mention here as we
commemorate the hundreth anniversary of his birth."
I have cited these six cases of significant divergences between what
is good public policy and what is profitable to suggest that there have
been a great number and a great variety of such divergences quite
apart from any that result either from mere monopoly restrictions of
output and monopsony restrictions of input or from inadequate aggregate
demand. It seems to me economists should be actively concerned
both to discover such divergences and to devise remedies for them.
But I do not mean to imply that this task of correcting defects in our
scheme of pecuniary incentives is one that can ever be completed. There
will continue to be many significant divergences between what is profitable
and what is in the public interest. For one thing people's ideas
about what is in the public interest change with the passage of time.
For another both economic conditions and the law are continually
changing, and with changes in economic conditions and changes in the
law new divergences are bound to develop. Indeed, when one reflects
on all the aspects of the law that condition the profit system, it is clear
it could hardly be otherwise. Anything like perfect coincidence of the
profitable and the common good would require something like perfection
plus perfect up-to-dateness in the law of property; of conditional
sale, lease and other forms of contract; of torts; of debt and collateral
security; and of partnerships and corporations; not to mention the




#### Split:

R. T. Ely, Property and Contract (New York, 1922), esp. Pt. I, Ch. 20.
'T. Veblen, The Theory of Business Enterprise (New York, 1915), Ch. 5 and 6. Also,
"On the Nature of Capital: II. Investment, Intangible Assets, and the Pecuniary Magnate,
" Quart. Jour. Econ., Nov. 1908, XXIII. (Reprinted in The Place of Science and
Modern Civilization [New York, 1919], pp. 352-86.)