begins, the dislocating effects on these societies, in which there is often
an old hardened crust of economic and social institutions, are likely to
to be quite sharp-so sharp as to destroy the positions of some of the
lower groups more rapidly than opportunities elsewhere in the economy
may be created for them.
The next question follows from an affirmative answer to the first.
Can the political framework of the underdeveloped societies withstand
the strain which further widening of income inequality is likely to generate?
This query is pertinent if it is realized that the real per capita
income level of many underdeveloped societies today is lower than the
per capita income level of the presently developed societies before their
initial phases of industrialization. And yet the stresses of the dislocations
incident to early phases of industrialization in the developed countries
were sufficiently acute to strain the political and social fabric of
society, force major political reforms, and sometimes result in civil war.
The answer to the second question may be negative, even granted
that industrialization may be accompanied by a rise in real per capita
product. If, for many groups in society, the rise is even partly offset by
a decline in their proportional share in total product; if, consequently,
it is accompanied by widening of income inequality, the resulting pressures
and conflicts may necessitate drastic changes in social and political
organization. This gives rise to the next and crucial question: How
can either the institutional and political framework of the underdeveloped
societies or the processes of economic growth and industrialization
be modified to favor a sustained rise to higher levels of economic
performance and yet avoid the fatally simple remedy of an authoritarian
regime that would use the population as cannon-fodder in the fight for
economic achievement? How to minimize the cost of transition and
avoid paying the heavy price-in internal tensions, in long-run inefficiency
in providing means for satisfying wants of human beings as
individuals which the inflation of political power represented by
authoritarian regimes requires?
Facing these acute problems, one is cognizant of the dangers of taking
an extreme position. One extreme-particularly tempting to usis
to favor repetition of past patterns of the now developed countries,
patterns that, under the markedly different conditions of the presently
underdeveloped countries, are almost bound to put a strain on the existing
social and economic institutions and eventuate in revolutionary explosions
and authoritarian regimes. There is danger in simple analogies;
in arguing that because an unequal income distribution in Western
Europe in the past led to accumulation of savings and financing of basic
capital formation, the preservation or accentuation of present income
inequalities in the underdeveloped countries is necessary to secure the