My own studies of monetary history have made me extremely sym-
pathetic to the oft-quoted, much reviled, and as widely misunderstood,
comment by John Stuart Mill. "There cannot ," he wrote, “be in-
trinsically a more insignificant thing, in the economy of society, than
money; except in the character of a contrivance for sparing time and
labour. It is a machine for doing quickly and commodiously, what
would be done, though less quickly and commodiously, without it: and
like many other kinds of machinery, it only exerts a distinct and inde-
pendent influence of its own when it gets out of order" [7, p. 488].
True, money is only a machine, but it is an extraordinarily efficient
machine. Without it, we could not have begun to attain the astounding
growth in output and level of living we have experienced in the past
two centuries-any more than we could have done so without those
other marvelous machines that dot our countryside and enable us, for
the most part, simply to do more efficiently what could be done without
them at much greater cost in labor.
But money has one feature that these other machines do not share.
Because it is so pervasive, when it gets out of order, it throws a mon-
key wrench into the operation of all the other machines. The Great
Contraction is the most dramatic example but not the only one. Every
other major contraction in this country has been either produced by
monetary disorder or greatly exacerbated by monetary disorder. Every
major inflation has been produced by monetary expansion-mostly to
meet the overriding demands of war which have forced the creation of
money to supplement explicit taxation.
The first and most important lesson that history teaches about what
monetary policy can do—and it is a lesson of the most profound impor-
tance is that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a
major source of economic disturbance. This sounds like a negative
proposition: avoid major mistakes. In part it is. The Great Contraction
might not have occurred at all, and if it had, it would have been far less
severe, if the monetary authority had avoided mistakes, or if the mone-
tary arrangements had been those of an earlier time when there was no
central authority with the power to make the kinds of mistakes that the
Federal Reserve System made. The past few years, to come closer to
home, would have been steadier and more productive of economic well-
being if the Federal Reserve had avoided drastic and erratic changes of
direction, first expanding the money supply at an unduly rapid pace,
then, in early 1966, stepping on the brake too hard, then, at the end of
1966, reversing itself and resuming expansion until at least November,
1967, at a more rapid pace than can long be maintained without appre-
ciable inflation.
Even if the proposition that monetary policy can prevent money it-