HAROLD ADAMS INNIS
17
social scientist must do his best to maintain a sense of humor or a sense
of balance, and if he appears on occasion to strain for effects I hope
he will be forgiven. It is dangerous to appear humorous at the expense
of one's elders or, as the Anglican prayer book has it, “one's betters"
and I hope that anything I have said will be accepted in the proper
spirit. We can at least say that we have a properly developed inferiority
complex and know our places.
My appointment is a tribute to the toleration of the social sciences-
a recognition of the capacity of a subject to overlook regions and
nationalities and bifurcations within the social sciences even to the
lowest stratum of the economic historian. An expression of this toler-
ance has not been achieved without recognition of the importance of
political devices in checking the disastrous effects of a majority vote
with concentration on the election of representatives from densely
populated areas. I know that someone will be muttering that majorities
also have rights, and it may be that when that awful day of judgment
arrives when someone writes a doctor's thesis on the presidential ad-
dresses of this Association, as has been done for the American Historical
Association, the claims of majorities will be justified.
The limitations of tolerance have of course been evident. Candid ob-
servers have expressed regrets at the relative neglect of problems of eco-
nomic theory or of universal problems and the increasing prominence of
sessions concerned with specifically American problems—indeed
specifically American legislation. Groups with specialized interests have
hived off from the Association, including a group in which I have a
special interest, namely economic history, and have set up their own
side shows outside the main tent; or they have seen the space outside
crowded and have preferred to carve out places for themselves within
the main tent and form what a predecessor of mine has called splinter
groups. The climax has perhaps been reached with the selection of a
president from one such group. The responsibility of the president for
the general programme makes him aware of the difficulties he has cre-
ated, partly through the warnings of his predecessors and partly through
his own experience. In other words I am in the position of the man who
was about to be hung; when he was asked whether he had anything to
say, he replied "This will certainly teach me a lesson."
Having learned my lesson, I must begin by pleading for a general
emphasis on a universal approach and by insisting as an economist
that economic history is primarily concerned with the task of extending
the universal applicability of economic theory and of strengthening a
central core of interest. In the words of Plato the task of all knowledge
is to discover "the limits and proportions of things." The economic
historian must test the tools of economic analysis by applying them
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:09:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
