ordinary business terms and invoking a new kind or measure of regu-
latory control, regardless of whether the net effect of such a solution
is to destroy the independent action and voluntary choice which are
the essence of a free people's scale of values.
If, after the war, the labor market for economists encounters some-
thing of a glut, I am strongly of the opinion that the soundest solution
would lie in the direction of a shift-of those who have the fortitude
to endure such an experience-from government and academic into
industrial employment. Industry, if it could acquire a respect for
scientific approaches to business problems commensurate with the
respect it already has acquired for natural science, would benefit
greatly from the new outlook on management. But it too would have
to have a good deal of fortitude to endure the experience.
VI
If time permitted, I should like to point out that the suggestions I
have here set forth, however daring or utopian they may sound, have
substantial counterparts in actual business. There is a very large body
of practical experience, a voluminous record of factual information.
available as to what has actually transpired in the various situations in
which buyers and sellers, investors and managers, employers and
workers have dealt collectively with each other. Economic studies have
been very uneven in the interest that they have manifested in different
parts of this body of inductive materials or in the insight they have
shown in distilling lessons either for theoretical generalization or for
practical action from these data.
In the labor area of collective bargaining Professor Slichter has,
from the academic approach, considered both instances and potentiali-
ties of collaboration between labor unions and industrial management
in working out mutually acceptable and economically constructive wage
rates and practices.' Under the latter he has shown that it is possible
for labor to make contributions to the more productive administration
of industry. He supplies instances in which it is the union which has
stimulated or guided management rather than seeking a one-way
street to better income through curtailment of production. From the
ranks of professional union leadership such representatives as Clinton
Golden, Harold Ruttenberg, and Philip Murray have furnished further
*S. H. Slichter, Union Policies and Industrial Management (Washington, Brookings Inst.,


#### Split:
1941).
8
°C. S. Golden and H. J. Ruttenberg, The Dynamics of Industrial Democracy (New
York, Harper, 1942).
M. L. Cooke and P. Murray, Organized Labor and Production: Next Step in Industrial
Democracy (New York, Harper, 1940). See also various documents of R. J. Watt growing
out of his activities as American labor representative to the International Labor Office.