1945]
DAVIS: STANDARDS AND CONTENT OF LIVING
13
appreciated how important a cushion against the wartime restrictions.
since Pearl Harbor was provided by the heavy stocking up with dura-
ble and semidurable goods in the years 1938-41.
During the current war, in respect of consumption and adjustment
among the components of the content of living, our standards for de-
ferred application have risen strikingly. This is partly because of
technological improvements, prospects of cost reductions, hopes of
larger national income, and extensive advertising of goods and goals.
It is partly because millions have earned larger incomes, accumulated
more savings, and/or acquired more claims on future income than they
ever expected to have, and they feel justified in cherishing ampler and
better balanced deferred standards of living which a decade ago would
have seemed vain dreams. Meanwhile, other millions, who have had to
endure painful readjustments in their current content and standard
of living, feel justified in expecting at least to regain and even to im-
prove upon their former levels. Customer research organizations and
polls of public opinion have already scratched the surface of ascer-
taining some of the specific ways in which standards for post-war appli-
cation differ from the present content of living.
Now, however, we are in danger of erroneously forecasting the stand-
ard of living that Americans will choose after the war. I doubt very
much if we shall choose the combination of goods, work, freedoms, etc.,
that will yield a national income averaging 10-15 per cent above $1,000
per capita in 1943 dollars. Other factors aside, a good deal of the
increased money income during the war represents the extra inducement
to make sacrifices, for the time, in consumption, leisure, working con-
ditions, and freedoms. In the absence of national emergency even this
inducement would not suffice. From the standpoint of past and pros-
pective peacetime standards, we are considerably overemployed now.
When the war is really over, I do not believe that 60 million out of
135-140 million will choose to be "productively employed," if this is
interpreted in the usual narrow sense of excluding homemakers, vol-
unteer workers, the armed services, and those in various levels of
schooling, unless a far greater number engage in part-time employment
than is in prospect. The post-war standard of living that the people
actually choose will have more influence on the content of living than
the standards put forward by specialists, publicists, and political
leaders.
Conclusion
I have tried to make it easier to use a number of good terms with
fairly specific meanings, and to make it harder to use the phrase "stand-
ard of living" without pausing to consider which of a score of diverse
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:56:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
