rise in the education of workers and to changes in the demands for new
skills. The amount invested annually in such training can only be a
guess. H. F. Clark places it near to equal to the amount spent on formal
education. Even if it were only one-half as large, it would represent
currently an annual gross investment of about $15 billion. Elsewhere,
too, it is thought to be important. For example, some observers have
been impressed by the amount of such training under way in plants in
the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, apprenticeship has all but disappeared,
partly because it is now inefficient and partly because schools now perform
many of its functions. Its disappearance has been hastened no
doubt by the difficulty of enforcing apprenticeship agreements. Legally
they have come to smack of indentured service. The underlying economic
factors and behavior are clear enough. The apprentice is prepared
to serve during the initial period when his productivity is less than the
cost of his keep and of his training. Later, however, unless he is legally
restrained, he will seek other employment when his productivity begins
to exceed the cost of keep and training, which is the period during which
a master would expect to recoup on his earlier outlay.
To study on-the-job training Gary Becker [1] advances the theorem
that in competitive markets employees pay all the costs of their training
and none of these costs are ultimately borne by the firm. Becker points
out several implications. The notion that expenditures on training by a
firm generate external economies for other firms is not consistent with
this theorem. The theorem also indicates one force favoring the transfer
from on-the-job training to attending school. Since on-the-job training
reduces the net earnings of workers at the beginning and raises them
later on, this theorem also provides an explanation for the "steeper
slope of the curve relating income to age," for skilled than unskilled
workers, referred to earlier. 10 What all this adds up to is that the stage
is set to undertake meaningful economic studies of on-the-job training.
Happily we reach firmer ground in regard to education. Investment
in education has risen at a rapid rate and by itself may well account for
a substantial part of the otherwise unexplained rise in earnings. I shall
do no more than summarize some preliminary results about the total
costs of education including income foregone by students, the apparent
relation of these costs to consumer income and to alternative invest-
8

Based on comments made by Harold F. Clark at the Merrill Center for Economics,
summer 1959; also, see [4].

Based on observations made by a team of U. S. economists of which I was a member,
see Saturday Rev., Jan. 21, 1961.

10 Becker has also noted still another implication arising out of the fact that the income
and capital investment aspects of on-the-job training are tied together, which gives rise
to "permanent” and “transitory" income effects that may have substantial explanatory
value.
