bargaining cannot be successfully or even safely conducted under the
rules of blind man's buff.
Our fourth premise is that collective bargainers, besides having a
comprehensive array of relevant facts, require special facilities and
personnel for interpreting these facts or applying them to the solution
of the problems by which they are confronted. I have laid great stress
on the need of an organizational scheme through which the economic
desires of all those who have labor or property to contribute to the
economic process shall come to free expression and be combined, classified,
and formulated into a set of goals which constitute the actual
motivation of the people. But these goals are not to be achieved by the
methods of ignorance and brute strength. To a business community
that has proved to itself the indispensable value of scientific and engineering
personnel in its technological processes, it must become evident
also that professional expertness is no less needed on the social science
front. A beginning has been made, but there is still some lack of sincerity
or some failure to perceive just how these new professional
specialists are to be effectively used. Since there is much uncertainty
also among the professionals themselves, we may well give particular
consideration to this feature of collective bargaining.
V
The prominence already given to matters of business structure and
procedure should forewarn you that I am going to speak here not
merely of the rôle of the economist in business but also of the political
scientist or student of the processes of government or administration.
The special services of the expert in this field would be complementary
to those of the economist in any scheme of business privately but planfully
organized, on the basis of frank and studious collective bargaining
for the disposition of blocks of labor and capital. His knowledge
of the structure and functioning of large operative bodies must furnish
the setting within which the economist analyzes the content of the
deliberations of interrelated groups as to the workability and mutual
consistency of proposed price-and-production policies and practices.
The demand is not merely that both types of professional aid be supplied
but that the two lines of study be covered jointly. Here is a field
of truly interdisciplinary endeavor such as the Social Science Research
Council has been seeking to outline and promote.
If the interest group is badly defined or badly led, it becomes a poor
agency for economic functioning. Defects in both delimitation and
leadership manifest themselves glaringly in the pressure groups which
confront us today in places where constructive collective bargaining
is much needed. Remedy for these two types of defects must be ap-