however, not only gave me a feeling of strangeness that I spent most of
my first year trying to overcome, but also set in motion a process of
wondering about the content, purposes, and methods of economic in-
quiry that has remained with me ever since. One result was that (though
I have taught it and worked in it ever since) I never did have a course
in money and banking. This was one of the fields, according to my ad-
visers, in which the theory and the problems had been pretty well
worked out and agreed upon. Looking back (it was just after the Fed-
eral Reserve System had been established, and before wartime monetary
problems not to speak of postwar problems-had emerged), it does
appear to have been a time when old controversies had grown sterile
and most men thought they knew where they stood and found little
worth debating about. Yet we were on the threshold of a period of re-
vival of interest which has outstripped all preceding periods, and which
has I think had more effect upon economic theory and policy, including
the Keynesian “revolution" and a vast literature on the monetary as-
pects of the business cycle, than any other development of recent times.
In international trade, which has been my other main interest, I did
have a course. I was singularly fortunate to have Professor Taussig as
a teacher and guide in research, and to have as friends and fellow stu-
dents such men as Jacob Viner and Frank Graham. But in this field
also it was a relatively quiet time, and I heard frequently the com-
ment that international trade theory was the part of classical econom-
ics, more than any other, that had withstood the buffetings of time and
change and, along with its handmaiden, the gold standard, had come
down to us virtually intact and unscathed.
II
One strong impression from those days, which has remained ever
since, is the relativity of economic principles and policies to changing
conditions. Keynes remarked on the "Ricardian victory" as "due to a
complex of suitabilities in the doctrine to the environment.” This was
surely no less true of the Keynesian victory; and since then time has
moved on again, and even the Keynesians are becoming changed men.
A fair question is how much does our thinking lead and direct, and
how much does it merely follow, the changes in environment. Very
much in the literature of economics strikes me as rationalization after
the event. This is not, however, necessarily a belittling comment, pro-
vided we know what we are doing and recognize the limitations.
The alternation of periods of comparative quiet with periods of in-
tense intellectual ferment has been characteristic of the development
'J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (New York,


#### Split:
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1936), pp. 32-33.