16
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
[MARCH
Supreme Court, under the leadership of Chief Justice White, which in the
contemporary disposition to affix labels would generally be deemed to
have been conservative. Not only were attacks upon the regulatory
commissions on the ground of unconstitutional delegation of legislative
authority successfully repelled, but by the adoption in self-denial of a
narrow judicial review, the courts gave full effect to the large grants of
administrative discretion vested in these agencies. It was recognized
that the ever-present conflict between rule and discretion, arising from
the need under varying circumstances of according consideration to the
often divergent demands of certainty and of justice, is characteristic
of judicial as well as administrative determinations; and in view of
the essential regulatory purposes being served and the manifest legis-
lative intent that dominant responsibility for effectuating them be
vested in these specialized agencies, no inherent derogation from the
supremacy of law was found to be involved in the functioning of the
administrative tribunals. It was this established legal doctrine that
determined the status and potentialities of most of the subsequently
created regulatory commissions.
The attacks upon so-called “bureaucracy" as a process of control
spring chiefly from fear of the exercise of arbitrary power. When
adequate safeguards are provided against unjustifiable or capricious
action, it is the control policies themselves rather than the methods of
their execution that are really brought into question; and in our system
of administrative regulation such safeguards are in fact provided in a
good many ways by the legislatures, the agencies themselves, and the
courts. The regulatory commissions are created by the legislatures, and
their very existence, no less than the sufficiency of their resources, is
constantly subject to the legislative will. The fields of their operation
and the scope of their power, including applicable policies and
standards, are expressly prescribed. Responsibility for proper per-
formance of their regulatory functions runs directly to the legislatures,
with provision for periodic public accountability to them. The entire
structure of control in each sphere is thus subject to continual
modification on the basis of experience. In the exercise of their
authority, furthermore, the regulatory agencies are generally required
to provide due notice to all interests involved and to afford them full
and fair hearings. These agencies are frequently referred to as quasi-
judicial tribunals, because, as an incident to the performance of their
primary function of prescribing arrangements for the future, they
necessarily pass upon the propriety of existing adjustments. Much
more important is the fact that they usually follow quasi-judicial
procedures. These procedures arouse dissatisfaction on the part of those
who impatiently seek quick results through summary action, but they
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
