sore when the opponent wins by a little cheating. And we must try, all
along, gradually to improve the rules, as well as to obey and help enforce
them. The main injunctions that can be given are negative, especially
not to go too fast, not to oversimplify, not to grasp at easy solutions
for hard problems. I think the greatest danger is that suggested by
my text a "moralistic" approach, attributing social evil to sin, with the
implication of cure by liquidating somebody, or at least firing some
scapegoat, and seeking a savior. People are not bad, in the main, but
they are ignorant and do not understand. They have not been taught to
approach problems in terms of knowing and understanding, but to
obey some ancient rule, as interpreted by those in power, or follow
some new prophet. Democracy calls for leadership, but that does not
mean finding the right man or party and giving him or them irresponsible
power. We surely know what a dictator will do, once in power; he
will, indeed, use "science" to make everyone be good and do right.
I have used up my time without saying much about the alternatives
to the free economy; but that would be an endless task, and also one
for a corps of experts. Let me repeat that how people expect to cure
the social ills by a radical shift from business to democratic politics is a
question for which I see no answer except in terms of the psychology of
romantic prejudice and screwy thinking. Most of the evils inherent in
the market organization plainly inhere still more in political campaigning,
legislative debates, and administration, perhaps even judicial
trials. Especially the tendency to centralization and concentration of
power which can only go so far until voting and political discussion
will be empty forms if the boss allows them to go on at all. Yet freedom
is not enough; it was carried too far, and more and more political action
is called for, though it is dangerous; if only it can be in the main right
action, or not too far wrong! Democratic action is hard. It means
government by discussion, and the organization of discussion itself, as
I said before, involves the main problems. Not much intercommunication
is even theoretically possible. As the world is built, the cards are
heavily stacked in favor of centralization. Even in one direction, communication
is bad enough; among economists, for instance, the typical
reply to a criticism is, “but I didn't say that.” I myself have been made
a bad example for views I supposed I was arguing against all through
the years. As to inter-communication-even with two persons there is
an insoluble problem of dividing the time for both between speaking
and listening; and it is said to give rise sometimes to friction, even
causing dissolution of the holy marriage bond. With larger numbers, the
limitation increases rapidly, in I know not what form of compound
progression. One person can, indeed, be heard by a considerable number
and, with mechanical aids now available, by "the world," as well