all the names mentioned by the latter authors can be found in Schumpeter'
s index. But how different is the emphasis: reading Gide and
Rist you would be forgiven for thinking that Robert Owen was almost
as important as Robert Malthus; that Fourier and Saint-Simon were
much more important than Walras and Pareto. The A. Young in their
index is, of course, Arthur Young, not Allyn Young.
Now turn to Schumpeter. Everything is there; no name left out.
But now it is Marshall, Walras, Wicksell and such people who steal
the stage. Of course Adam Smith is given his due. But what a due!
He is rather patronizingly dismissed as a synthesizer who happened to
write the right book at the right time: his analytic contributions are
certainly minimized.

How can we account for these differences? By the fact that Schumpeter
is writing some 40 years after Gide and Rist? Only in the smallest
part, I think. By 1913 Wicksell, Wicksteed, and Wieser had done
their great work, but only Wieser gets a mention from Gide and Rist
-one mention. The treatment of Walras is even more indicative. Walras
is indeed mentioned by them; but yet not primarily for his work
as a theorist so much as for his views on nationalization of land, free
trade, and the State-views which Pareto and Schumpeter thought of
as simply silly, like Irving Fisher's food fads and teetotalism. To verify
that I am not having sport by picking on a particular set of authors,
turn from Gide and Rist to Alexander Gray's brief book, the
busy student's friend, to see how Walras fares there. In Gray, Leon
Walras is "crowded out" by his father Auguste and is referred to as
the "younger Walras," which is a little like referring to Maynard
Keynes as the "younger Keynes."

No one can really deny that we have two different sets of standards
here. When I began graduate study at Harvard in 1935, Schumpeter
rather shocked me by saying in a lecture that of the four greatest economists
in the world, three were French. (I had thought the nonFrenchman
was English, probably Adam Smith; but after looking into
Schumpeter's later book for the purpose of checking, I think my inference
must have been incorrect and that he then meant Alfred Marshall
rather than Smith.) And who were the Frenchmen?

Of course, one was Leon Walras, whom Schumpeter had no hesitation
in calling the greatest economist of all time, by virtue of his first
formulation of general equilibrium. Today there can be little doubt
that most of the literary and mathematical economic theory appearing
in our professional journals is more an offspring of Walras than of anyone
else (and I stress the adjective literary). The comparison that
Lagrange made of Newton is worth repeating in this connection: Assuredly
Newton was the greatest man of science, but also the luckiest.