of other members of the profession. Economists, in contrast, often with
sadistic glee devote a large part of their efforts to tearing down the repu-
tations of other economists. This reflects more than the relative new-
ness of economics and the apologetic attitude many economists have
because they are not certain that our discipline is either a science or a
profession. Assuredly, it involves bad manners, which as individuals we
should guard against. A word of approval for work well done is far more
helpful than the most logical criticism, which overlooks human sensi-
bilities.
In the last analysis, research has its own rewards. There are few
satisfactions as great as the sense of accomplishment which a scholar
gets when he completes a well-done task. This is particularly true of
research on public policy questions; for as Robert M. LaFollette, Sr.
said, in an address at the University of Wisconsin, in the year I enrolled
as a freshman, more than 50 years ago: "It is a glorious service, this
service for country. Each one should count it a patriotic duty to build at
least a part of his life into the life of his country, to do his share in the
making of America according to the plan of the fathers."
Concluding this old man's counsel of advice, which makes no pretense
at words of wisdom, I can do no better than to quote President Theodore
Roosevelt's statement exalting the doer of deeds:
It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the
strong man stumbled, or where the doer of deeds could have done them
better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena;
whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who strives vali-
antly; who errs and comes up short again and again; who knows the
great enthusiasms, the great devotions and spends himself in a worthy
cause; who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achieve-
ment; and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring
greatly; so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls
who know neither defeat nor victory. 15
15 Quoted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in his Madison Square Garden Address on the
eve of the election of 1936.