1946]
SHARFMAN: LAW AND ECONOMICS
11
mutually advantageous international agreements constitute concrete
expressions of sovereignty rather than its denial.
We are now in the midst of a determined quest for durable peace
among nations and for economic security at home, and in connection
with this far-reaching effort the institutional implications of collective
control have come to sharp focus. But there appears to be no justifiable
basis for assuming that even these objectives are necessarily in conflict
with the maintenance of national sovereignty or individual freedom. The
goals are more positive and comprehensive than any previously sought
on so broad a foundation of popular support or with like insistence,
but they are being pursued for the most part within the established
structure of political nationalism and economic individualism. Effective
removal of the menace of war is essential to the constructive fruition
of national purposes; adequate concern with continuing maintenance
of a high level of production and employment is an indispensable
condition of economic welfare. Collective effort toward these major
ends, as generally envisaged, is but calculated to create a favoring
environment for national and individual self-realization. Fortunately
the obstacles to international coöperation springing from legalistic
conceptions of sovereignty are rapidly dissolving. In the domestic field
we are much more hesitant-for fear, basically, of undue encroach-
ment upon individual freedom. There are, without doubt, many pitfalls
and immense difficulties in interrelating soundly and fruitfully the great
variety of elements, public and private, relevant to the achievement of
economic stability at a prosperity level; and there is much room for
controversy with respect to numerous technical questions clustering
about wage adjustments, price policies, investment functions, monetary
management, fiscal practices, and a host of other complex factors. But
sweeping repudiation of public responsibility for economic stabilization
is largely a make-believe procedure; and the ready identification of all
public policies that may in some fashion be characterized as economic
planning with the exercise of dictatorial power and the use of arbitrary
methods as inevitably involving authoritative allocation of resources.
and imposition of direct controls over all significant aspects of the
economy-simply does not square with the character of prevailing
non-emergency controls, or of the relatively modest proposals being
sponsored, or likely to be sponsored, by any substantial and responsible
segment of our polity. Such an approach leads to reliance, not upon
documented economic dangers, but upon such emotion-laden and
question-begging shibboleths as "regimentation" and "centralization,"
broadcast with little reference to the inescapable dependence of the
individual upon social process, the essentially national scope of the
established economic system, the reasonably reassuring actualițies in
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:57:15 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
