more per cent increase, crop yield per acre is limited. Yield increases
are promising, of course. After all, "over a large part of the world
today agricultural productivity is now the same as, or even inferior to,
what it was in the leading civilized communities 2,000 years ago" [9,
p. 78]. Yields per acre vary widely; thus Japan produces roughly 3-4
times as much rice per acre as do South and Southeast Asian lands.
This variation is associated mainly with variation in input of fertilizer,
addition of a kilogram of which may increase grain output about 10
kilograms, given suitable methods of cultivation. Developed countries
use 5 times as much fertilizer per acre as do the underdeveloped; Europe
uses about 20 times as much as do Africa and Asia and 9 times as
much as does Latin America; Japan uses over 100 times as much as do
India and Pakistan.

In many if not most underdeveloped countries pre-takeoff conditions
essential to the great upsurges in yields experienced in the United
States, Britain, and Japan have not yet been established [5]. Nor are
they soon likely to be established, given excessive population growth
and heightened barriers to the detraditionalizing of agriculture. Yet, as
James Bonner shows, even if a takeoff is experienced, it cannot carry
average production per acre above the limits "determined by the factors
that regulate photosynthetic efficiency" and "being approached
today . . . in parts of Japan, of Western Europe, and of the United
States” [4, p. 14] [5]. Within limits, of course, the amount of nutrient
supplied per acre can be augmented through recourse to higher-yield
crops (e.g., soya beans).

The future of the food problem may be stated simply. Suppose we
increase world output 700 per cent by doubling crop acreage and quadrupling
yields. World population would catch up with this increase in
about 107 years, given an annual growth rate of 2 per cent, and in
about 140 years, given a 1.5 per cent rate. Trebling crop acreage would
add perhaps a quarter to the above output, but only about one-tenth to
the years of grace. Rationalization of fisheries would not change the
data significantly. Augmentation of the food supply in the measure indicated
is unlikely. This is not one world; requisite knowledge and its
necessary complements are not likely to be imported and assimilated.
rapidly in backward lands; nor will progressive lands have incentive to
export food, mainly cereal (of which about 5 per cent net is redistributed
by international commerce) to exchange-short countries.
Turning from land, the principal source of man's food and the sole
source of his living space, to water and minerals, the other primary ingredients
of man's material well-being, one encounters limitations parallel
to those of land. A precise measure of these limitations is not available.
It depends on rates of consumption which are rising, upon actual