underdeveloped world. The pressure of numbers upon family resources
generated by the decline of infant and child mortality has not yet
widely reduced births per mother. Governments not only show little
awareness of the urgency of the population problem; they even cush-
ion the incidence of child-rearing costs on responsible parents. The
Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, together with in-
dividual countries, has sanctioned making contraceptive assistance in-
ternationally available, but governments have provided little incentive
thereto [36].
The economic implications of United Nations studies of fertility and
population growth are at least fourfold. First, for a number of dec-
ades population growth will absorb large amounts of physical and per-
sonal capital that might otherwise have been used to elevate per capita
income. For example, ceteris paribus, per capita income can grow at
least one percentage point more per year, given a zero instead of a
two-per-cent-per-year rate of population growth. Second, little explan-
atory insight is provided by economic models which merely suggest
that income will permanently outstrip numbers, but which are un-
equipped with feedback mechanisms that produce at least limited down-
ward movements of fertility. It is necessary to show that movements
of income generate even greater relative demands for present and fu-
ture goods, services, and leisure; that elasticity of consumption expec-
tations exceeds elasticity of income expectations. Then, if the standard
of life rose ratchet-like, but always guarded against decline by pawl-
like acquired tastes, one might count upon the retention of internalized
standards. Third, the apparent existence of a set of interrelated thresh-
olds suggests that international differences in shorter-run fertility-
affecting constants are dissipatable through subjection to socioeco-
nomic solvents. Fourth, even though these parametrical differences
exist, it is certain that fertility can be greatly reduced, given availabili-
ty of contraceptives, if having more than a stipulated number of chil-
dren, say three, is economically penalized instead of subsidized as at
present. That it would pay the governments of underdeveloped coun-
tries to reward those who curb their fertility has been demonstrated by
Stephen Enke who estimates one dollar thus spent to be worth about
$100 of other forms of aid [17].
III. The Future
Technology, prudence, and reason could generate a bright future.
That it will be bright, however, is questionable, given an unfettered
stork, together with continuing escalation of submarginal man in a
world of Freudian irresponsibility and distribution according to al-