ment. Government and business or government's role in the economy
has in the last quarter century become an important course subject in
nearly all major universities. Almost without exception, however, text-
books written on this subject take a narrower view of the relations be-
tween government and business than the facts warrant. Some texts are
pretty much treatises on the attempts to preserve competition through
governmental action; others deal, more broadly, with all types of gov-
ernmental regulation of private business. Some picture the economy as
existing independently of government, which is reduced to an outside
institution interfering with business in the interests of consumers or the
general public. Government interference also is pictured as having been
well nigh absent in the early history of our nation. And government
regulation is discussed as still restricted mainly to public utilities and the
fields of communication and transportation.
Studies sponsored by the Economic History Association in the last
decade have established that this is a completely false account histo-
rically. There never was a time when laissez faire prevailed in the
United States. In the early days of the Republic there was rather more
than less regulation of business than today. This was mainly local and
state, rather than national regulation, but it was very extensive. Regu-
lation has existed in the United States "from time immemorial," and
substantially all businesses then existing were regulated. The Constitu-
tion was adopted not to give us a weaker but a stronger government.
Not one line in that great instrument of freedom even remotely suggests
a policy of laissez faire.
The American creed is not that of a government which is an oppressor
but Lincoln's “a government of the people, by the people, and for the
people." While wanting as little restriction as possible for the individual,
Americans have always turned to government to help them when in
economic difficulties. They have followed the principle, also expressed
by Lincoln: "Government should do for a people what they cannot do
themselves or that which they cannot do so well for themselves in their
individual capacities."
If all that government does is labeled “regulation," then government's
role in the economy can be described as that of the regulator. To me it
3 These include notable studies of the economic policies of the states prior to the Civil War,


#### Split:
among them: Oscar and Mary Handlin, Commonwealth: A Study of the Role of Government in
the American Economy, Massachusetts, 1774-1861 (New York, 1947); Louis Hartz, Economic
Policy and Democratic Thought, 1776–1860 (Cambridge, 1948); Milton S. Heath, Constructive
Liberalism: The Role of the State in the Economic Development in Georgia to 1860 (Cambridge,
1954). Telling the same story are the many more specialized articles on the economic policies
of the early United States by Carter Goodrich, president of the Economic History Association
in 1956.
4 "Fragment on Government,” Nicolay and Hays, Abraham Lincoln, Complete Works (New
York, 1890), Vol. I, p. 180.