The American Economic Review
VOLUME XXXVII
MARCH, 1947
THE ECONOMIST AND THE STATE¹
By E. A. GOLDENWEISER
NUMBER ONE
According to Victorian reckoning, this is the Diamond Jubilee of the
American Economic Association. In the charter of incorporation of this
Association its purposes are stated as follows: "(1) The encouragement
of economic research . . . (2) The issue of publications on economic sub-
jects, and (3) The encouragement of perfect freedom of economic discus-
sion. The Association as such [italics supplied] will take no partisan
attitude, nor will it commit its members to any position on practical
economic questions."
Admirable purposes and principles. In pursuing them the Association,
over the sixty years of its life, has rendered invaluable service to the
profession. It has offered an opportunity for economists to present their
ideas to colleagues and to have these ideas discussed at the meetings.
It has enabled members through the Proceedings and the Review, to
keep in touch with the work and thinking of fellow-members. It has
also and this perhaps has been its greatest service offered an oppor-
tunity for many members to get together once a year and to become
acquainted with each other. It has created a degree of esprit de corps
among economists.
But it has remained aloof from practical affairs. It has been academic,
though in the fine, not the derogatory, sense of the word. In the mean-
time profound changes have occurred in the life of the country. Not only
has the elimination of time and space from travel and communications
made all decisions necessarily more urgent and decisive, but the growth of
economic units and the concentration of economic power have imparted
to a vastly larger proportion of public and private actions a nation-
wide, nay, a world-wide significance. The United States can no longer
remain complacently aloof behind the oceans, nor the economist behind
the book stacks. An economist's study can no longer be his world; the
entire world must be his study.
To an ever-growing extent public authorities and national and inter-
national business enterprises turn to economists for advice and guid-
1 Presidential address delivered at the Fifty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the American Eco-
nomic Association, Atlantic City, January 25, 1947.
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 01:58:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
