12
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
reason that it would shortly become more difficult to collect from their
customers or to raise funds by borrowing, while they in turn were being
pressed by their creditors. Under the circumstances it seemed only
prudent to conserve cash on hand, if not also to reduce inventories or
accounts receivable. Such efforts by some led to similar efforts by
others, in a widening circle. As pressure on commodity markets, se-
curity markets, and on the banking system mounted, the decline of
business activity was speeded and the readjustment of interest rates,
particularly on the longer maturities, was delayed. More often than
not the scramble for liquidity ran its course without reaching crisis
proportions. Sometimes, however, as in 1873, 1893, and 1907, events
took a sinister turn. Financial pressures then became so acute that
doubts arose about the ability of banks to meet their outstanding ob-
ligations and, as people rushed to convert their deposits into currency,
even the soundest banks were forced to restrict the outflow of cash.
With the nation's system for making monetary payments disrupted,
panic ruled for a time over the economy and production inevitably
slumped badly.
It was this dramatic phase of the business cycle that first attracted
wide notice and stimulated students of public affairs to seek ways and
means of improving our financial organization. The Federal Reserve
Act, which became law under the shadow of the crisis of 1907, re-
quired the pooling of bank reserves and established facilities for tem-
porary borrowing by banks. The hope that this financial reform would
ease the transition from the expanding to the contracting phase of busi-
ness cycles has been amply justified by experience. But the Federal
Reserve System could not prevent the cumulation of financial trouble
during business expansions. Nor could it prevent runs on banks or mas-
sive bank failures, as the Great Depression demonstrated. The need to
overhaul and strengthen the financial system became increasingly clear
during the 'thirties and led to numerous reforms, among them the in-
surance of mortgages, the creation of a secondary market for mort-
gages, the insurance of savings and loan accounts, and-most important
of all the insurance of bank deposits. These financial reforms have
served powerfully to limit the propagation of fear, which in the past
had been a major factor in intensifying slumps of production.
But more basic than the financial innovations or any other specific
measures of policy has been the change in economic and political atti-
tudes which took root during the 'thirties. The economic theory that
depressions promote industrial efficiency and economic progress lost
adherents as evidence accumulated of the wreckage caused by unem-
ployment and business failures. The political belief that it was best to
leave business storms to blow themselves out lost its grip on men's
This content downloaded from
73.69.85.185 on Sat, 01 Oct 2022 02:17:04 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
