1942]
SLICHTER: THE CONDITIONS OF EXPANSION
11
on capital is determined by price trends and by expectations.20 Of
course, if the United States by any chance were able to arrange its
affairs to permit the exportation of capital on a considerable scale in
the post-war world, the problem of opportunities for extensive invest-
ment would be a generation or two in the future.
Technological research is growing rapidly, as the ninefold increase
in personnel in twenty years indicates, and it will undoubtedly con-
tinue to grow rapidly. Indeed it must now be regarded as one of the
most important instruments of economic adjustment. But even today
there are only about 3,500 industrial research laboratories in the coun-
try. Out of over 100 billion dollars of sales by corporations only 300
million dollars goes into industrial research, or less than one-third of
one per cent. Virtually half of all industrial research is done by four
industries-chemicals, petroleum, electrical apparatus, and electrical
communications. In 1940, there were about 15,000 chemists in industry
and about the same number of engineers, but only 2,000 physicists.21
Some people believe that the present war will put the physicists into
industry in much the same way that World War I put the chemists into
industry. Private enterprise has never yet had to face squarely the
question of whether it is able to provide over the long term the amount
of employment which the community expects. When it is confronted
with this question, the expansion of industrial research may be consider-
able. Likewise one may expect considerable expansion of "new product"
departments charged with the responsibility of discovering opportuni-
ties for new products and assisting in their development. Only a few
concerns now possess such departments. Little has been attempted
by public policy to make industrial research more easily available to
small enterprises. All of this points to the conclusion that industrial
research is in its infancy and that it offers a way of providing investment
opportunities that will be far more important in the future than in
the past.
VIII
By the end of the war, roughly one-third of the pay rolls of industry
will be directly determined by collective bargaining. Wage rates in
20 As men were thrown out of work in the capital goods industries through failure of
the increase in the working force to create opportunities for extensive investment, the
unemployed would become available for employment in new plants and on new machines
and thus would furnish opportunities for extensive investment. But the idle plant produced
by the contraction of employment would limit the return on new investment and thus
tend to discourage it. Whether or not unemployment produced extensive investment,
therefore, would depend upon the terms on which the unemployed would accept work. They
would need to be willing to accept employment at sufficiently below current rates to
make new investment opportunities attractive despite the existence of idle plant and
machines.
21 National Resources Planning Board, Research--a National Resource, vol. II, Industrial
Research, pp. 176-77.
