gestion that he postpone reforms until recovery had made good progress,
so did Léon Blum the advice of his Scandinavian and British
socialist friends who recommended that expansion take precedence
over reform.5
On the international level the slow-motion, beggar-my-neighbor
devaluation of all currencies of the world at intervals of a few years—
sterling in 1931, the dollar in 1933-34, the gold bloc currencies in 1936
and so on-inflicted upon different groups of countries protracted
periods of overvalued currencies, causing deficits and losses, further
trade restrictions, and more depression. Although each of these devaluations
in isolation can be defended as unavoidable, their time pattern
stamped the whole approach as a sadistic policy, calculated to maximize
pain and destruction. It was like cutting off the tail of a dog piece by
piece instead of all at once, the way it surely would have been done had
there existed the International Monetary Fund.
These institutional defects and horrendous policy mistakes have
nothing to do with basic weaknesses or contradictions of the capitalist,
free enterprise economy, or with a tendency toward secular stagnation,
lack of investment opportunities and a chronic tendency toward oversaving,
or gigantic real maladjustments. At any rate, wherever the
monetary deflation was stopped by orthodox or unorthodox measures
without at the same time sharply raising costs, the alleged real, structural
contradictions, weaknesses, and maladjustments disappeared as
fast as they had appeared a few years earlier.
It is true the methods used to stop deflation were very unorthodox in
many countries (not in all), and there remained almost everywhere a
legacy of high tariffs, tight quotas and many other restrictions on international
trade and payments. But the point is that this was not
necessary; deflation could have been stopped and the economy “reflated”
in a more orderly, less unorthodox fashion with less structural
change and without damage to the international division of labor. Even
as it was, if in the meantime the threat of war had not arisen and the
war had not come, surely a good part of the new trade barriers would
have been removed and trading methods would have returned to a more
normal state of affairs. Actually, the outbreak of World War II delayed
the return to something resembling the pre-1929 conditions until the
1950's.
5 On Keynes' criticism of the New Deal policies compare R. F. Harrod, The Life of John


#### Split:
Maynard Keynes, New York, 1951, p. 447. Keynes was critical not of the reforms as such,
but of the timing of their introduction and of the methods of putting them through, which,
by frightening the businessman, unnecessarily delayed full recovery.
The information concerning Léon Blum I owe to Gunnar Myrdal.
6 This does not mean that the price level would have to go back to the 1929 level.