provided it is recognized that we are at a relatively early stage in a
long process of interplay among tentative summaries of evidence,
preliminary hypotheses, and search for additional evidence that might
lead to reformulation and revisions—as bases for new analysis and
further search.
The present instalment of initial speculation may be introduced by
saying that a long-term constancy, let alone reduction, of inequality in
the secular income structure is a puzzle. For there are at least two
groups of forces in the long-term operation of developed countries that
make for increasing inequality in the distribution of income before
taxes and excluding contributions by governments. The first group
relates to the concentration of savings in the upper-income brackets.
According to all recent studies of the apportionment of income between
consumption and savings, only the upper-income groups save; the
total savings of groups below the top decile are fairly close to zero. For
example, the top 5 per cent of units in the United States appear to
account for almost two-thirds of individuals' savings; and the top
decile comes close to accounting for all of it. What is particularly im-
portant is that the inequality in distribution of savings is greater than
that in the distribution of property incomes, and hence of assets.2
Granted that this finding is based on distribution of annual income,
and that a distribution by secular levels would show less inequality in
income and correspondingly less concentration of savings, the in-
equality in savings would still remain fairly sharp, perhaps more so
than in holdings of assets. Other conditions being equal, the cumulative
effect of such inequality in savings would be the concentration of an
increasing proportion of income-yielding assets in the hands of the
upper groups a basis for larger income shares of these groups and
their descendants.
The second source of the puzzle lies in the industrial structure of
the income distribution. An invariable accompaniment of growth in
developed countries is the shift away from agriculture, a process usu-
ally referred to as industrialization and urbanization. The income dis-
tribution of the total population, in the simplest model, may therefore
be viewed as a combination of the income distributions of the rural
and of the urban populations. What little we know of the structures
of these two component income distributions reveals that: (a) the
average per capita income of the rural population is usually lower than
that of the urban;³ (b) inequality in the percentage shares within the
* See Kuznets, op. cit., particularly Chapters 2 and 6.


#### Split:
*The lower level of per capita income of the agricultural or rural population compared
with that of urban is fairly well established, for this country by states, and for many