ism. But look at the journals and monographs and you find that re-
search on alternative approaches to the theory of the firm is regularly
reported with the implication that a superior theory may eventually
replace marginalism. This replacement, however, according to the pro-
ponents of the best-known alternatives to marginalism, is expected
chiefly with regard to industries where firms are few and competition is
ineffective. The marginalist solution of price determination under con-
ditions of heavy competition is not seriously contested.
In pointing this out, I am not trying to claim that marginal analysis
is invincible and forever irreplaceable. If I follow the philosophy of
science which, instead of pronouncing theories "false" or "true," dis-
tinguishes only between those “rejected" and those "still open to criti-
cism" [30, pp. 246-48], the only victory that can be claimed for the
cause of marginalism is that it is still open to criticism. I must go be-
yond this and concede that some anti-marginalist suggestions have led
in recent years to a number of revisions in the marginal analysis of the
firm which amount to the incorporation of other goals besides money
profits into expanded marginalist objective functions.
The Alternative Approaches
In their arguments against the profit-maximization model the var-
ious alternative approaches to the theory of the firm are very much
alike; only their positive programs can distinguish them.
The program of behaviorism is to reject preconceptions and assump-
tions and to rely only on observation of overt behavior. Thus, beha-
viorism rejects the assumption of marginal analysis that economic ac-
tion is directed by the objective to maximize the attainment of ends
with given means, and that business action can be deduced from a pos-
tulate that firms attempt to maximize money profits. Instead, we are
directed to observe how businessmen really act and by what processes
they reach decisions.
Perhaps it is not entirely fair to suggest here an association between
"behaviorism" and the working program of the proponents of a “be-
havioral theory of the firm" [10]. In any case, behavioral research
proposes to observe and study the "real processes," in the sense of a
"well-defined sequence of behaviors" by which decisions are reached in
"actual business organizations." The hope-faithfully inductive-is to
develop a theory "with generality beyond the specific firms studied"
[10, p. 2]. Such a theory will be based on "four major sub-theories"
regarding “organizational goals, organizational expectations, organiza-
tional choice, and organizational control" [10, p. 21]. It is assumed
that five organizational goals-a production goal, an inventory goal, a
sales goal, a market-share goal, and the profit goal-become the sub-