because governmental revenues are then declining. The social security
system is more likely to grow than to remain stationary or contract.
Private pension arrangements will multiply and so also may private
supplements to unemployment insurance. Our population will continue
to grow. The restlessness and eagerness of consumers to live better is
likely to remain a dynamic force. Research and development activities
will continue to enlarge opportunities for investment. Governmental
efforts to promote a high and expanding level of economic activity are
not likely to weaken. Private businesses will continue to seek ways to
economize on inventories and otherwise minimize the risk of cyclical
fluctuations in their operations. Employment in agriculture is already
so low that its further decline can no longer offset future gains of the
service industries on the scale experienced in the past. The spread of
white-collar occupations throughout the range of industry will continue
and may even accelerate. For all these reasons, the business cycle is
unlikely to be as disturbing or troublesome to our children as it once
was to us or our fathers.
This is surely a reasonable expectation as we look to the future. Yet,
it is well to remember that projections of human experience remain
descriptions of a limited past no matter how alluringly they are expressed
in language of the future. A lesson of history, which keeps resounding
through the ages, is that the most reasonable of expectations.
sometimes lead nations astray. If my analysis is sound, it supports the
judgment that the recessions or depressions of the future are likely to
be appreciably milder on the average than they were before the 1940's.
It supports no more than this. In view of the inherent variability of
business cycles and our still somewhat haphazard ways of dealing with
them, there can be no assurance that episodic factors will not make a
future recession both longer and deeper than any we experienced in
the postwar period.
Nor can there be any assurance that the conjuncture of structural
changes on which I have dwelt will not be succeeded by another which
will prove less favorable to economic stability. For example, although
the stabilizing influence of the rising trend of white-collar employment
in manufacturing has been more than sufficient to offset the cyclically
intensifying influence of a greater concentration of employment in the
durable goods sector, the balance of forces might be tipped the other
way in the future. This could happen all the more readily if, as whitecollar
work continues to grow, the need to cut costs during a recession
should make this type of employment less stable than it has been.
Again, our exports in recent decades have tended to intensify the business
cycle somewhat, and this factor may become of larger significance.