Europe inflation was stopped abruptly in a series of successful stabiliza-
tion efforts between 1922 and 1925 without any immediate depressive
effects.
By the middle of the 1920's the world was back on what looked
like a normal course with most currencies again convertible. It is true,
tariffs were higher and less stable than before and had a tendency to
go higher; moreover, the integrated area of the Austro-Hungarian
monarchy was fragmented into several pieces. But despite these un-
favorable developments, world trade expanded fairly rapidly to some-
thing like 30 per cent above the prewar level. The effective exclusion
of Russia from the world economy, although an event of tremendous
political consequence, had a very limited economic impact on the world.
economy during the interwar period.¹
Then came the Great Depression and the picture changed completely.
The few remaining free trade countries, Great Britain¹a first, switched
abruptly to high protection. Tariffs everywhere were raised rapidly and
almost all countries introduced quotas, exchange control, import pro-
hibitions, bilateral clearings-methods of international trading which
in peacetime had literally not been known for centuries. By 1932
the dollar value of world exports had tumbled to about a third of its
1929 level and its quantum was where it had been in 1913.
The quantum of trade in manufactured articles declined much faster
than that of trade in primary products, but the value of the latter
fell more, which reflects the extremely sharp deterioration of the terms
of trade for the exporters of primary products.
In 1938 the quantum of trade of primary products was again 16 per
cent above the 1913 level. While the world index of manufacturing
activity in 1936-38 was 85 per cent above the 1913 level, the quantum
of trade of manufactured articles was some 8 per cent below 1913 [3]
[25, Ch. 2.] This contrast can be regarded as a rough indication of
the degree of disintegration of the world economy that had taken place.
For the purposes of this paper, as indicated above, I have to venture
to express my views on the basic causes of the exceptional severity and
length of the Great Depression. At the time when it happened most


#### Split:
"It is interesting that only at the lowest point of the depression in 1931-32 did trade with
Russia temporarily assume a somewhat greater importance for some European countries.
¹a It is true that during and immediately after World War I Great Britain applied a stiff
dose of tariff protection (the so-called “MacKenna" and "Key Industry" duties). But they
applied only to a short list of industrial articles, and some were temporarily removed
by Philip Snowden, Chancellor of the Exchequer in the first MacDonald ministry in 1924.
3 The concept "world manufacturing activity" is, of course, somewhat nebulous and its
measure arbitrary and imprecise. But the statements in the text could be restated in terms
of GNP, industrial production, and trade of the major countries, concepts that are less ob-
jectionable than "world production,” etc.
2