KNIGHT: PRINCIPLES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS
23
relative neglect of the third member of the trio, beauty and taste-
taste that is good or bad, in contrast with “mere” taste-and the even
more neglected rôle of play or fun, entirely left out of the good life.
in our Hebrew-Puritan tradition. You will recall that Socrates-Plato
thought that virtue is knowledge (meaning reasoned knowledge, like
mathematics, not science) in opposition to the Christian (Pauline)
view, that we know the good but choose the evil. (But Aristotle at least
partly disagreed with Plato, and a famous saying of Ovid sides with
Paul.) My point is that I see the main task of education in our age as
training to separate believing and believing-in from liking for other
reasons, at the crudest level, to distinguish sound from sense and in
general, truth from esthetic or moral or any "romantic" attraction. In
any case, indoctrination is a vicious trap, and a liberal must wish it were
impossible. The first test of a free society is that it teach its youth to
question and criticize and form opinions only by weighing evidence—
and to admit ignorance where there is no evidence-instead of implant-
ing eternal and immutable truth, with abject submission to the inevita-
ble authoritative interpreter, by some prescriptive right. And on the
other side, it is an equally pernicious idea that by education a society
can lift itself by its bootstraps. Who is to educate the educators? Only
some absolute authority, manifestly. And control of education is the first
aim of the totalitarian. His ideal is a priesthood as the custodians of
Truth, "conditioning" each generation in helpless infancy to unques-
tioning belief, and to go through life like little children.
One of the hardest lessons which in my opinion our democracy has
to learn is to make necessary reservations about much of our ethical
tradition, propagated under religious or church auspices. It should
be superfluous to point out that this is an inheritance from an age when
virtue in the common man was thought by everyone to consist precisely
in the acceptance and submission I just spoke of-conformity to a
sacred law and obedience to consecrated authority, Holy Mother
Church and Holy Father King. What our Sunday-school moral adages
mean is simply the command to be good children and mind Momma
and Poppa. They sound well, and their sentiment has a place; but if
we ask what they mean, from the standpoint of democratic citizenship,
they are simply irrelevant. When they were proclaimed, the idea that
the ordinary man (not to mention the woman) should make and un-
make the laws and literally hire and fire the rulers, would have pro-
voked only loathing and terror, if it had been dreamed of as a possibility.
Even the "Golden Rule," to treat others as you would be treated, is also
an epigram. First, it should of course be as the other himself would
be treated, or as "you" would be in his place, and with him in yours.
But for the slave master, what the slave would want would be to change
