20
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
suggested by present comparisons between net capital formation rates
of 3 to 5 per cent of national product in underdeveloped countries and
rates of 10 to 15 per cent in developed countries. If then, at least in the
older countries, and perhaps even in the younger ones-prior to initia-
tion of the process of modern development—we begin with low secular
levels in the savings proportions, there would be a rise in the early
phases to appreciably higher levels. We also know that during recent
periods the net capital formation proportion and even the gross, failed
to rise and perhaps even declined.
Other trends might be suggested that would possibly trace long
swings similar to those for inequality in income structure, rate of growth
of population, rate of urbanization and internal migration, and the pro-
portion of savings or capital formation to national product. For ex-
ample, such swings might be found in the ratio of foreign trade to
domestic activities; in the aspects, if we could only measure them prop-
erly, of government activity that bear upon market forces (there
must have been a phase of increasing freedom of market forces,
giving way to greater intervention by government). But the suggestions
already made suffice to indicate that the long swing in income inequality
must be viewed as part of a wider process of economic growth, and
interrelated with similar movements in other elements. The long alter-
nation in the rate of growth of population can be seen partly as a cause,
partly as an effect of the long swing in income inequality which was
associated with a secular rise in real per capita income levels. The long
swing in income inequality is also probably closely associated with the
swing in capital formation proportions-in so far as wider inequality
makes for higher, and narrower inequality for lower, country-wide sav-
ings proportions.
IV. Comparison of Developed and Underdeveloped Countries
What is the bearing of the experience of the developed countries upon
the economic growth of underdeveloped countries? Let us examine
briefly the data on income distribution in the latter, and speculate upon
some of the implications.
As might have been expected, such data for underdeveloped countries
are scanty. For the present purpose distributions of family income for
India in 1949-50, for Ceylon in 1950, and for Puerto Rico in 1948 were
used. While the coverage is narrow and the margin of error wide, the
data show that income distribution in these underdeveloped countries
is somewhat more unequal than in the developed countries during the
period after the second world war. Thus the shares of the lower 3 quin-
tiles are 28 per cent in India, 30 per cent in Ceylon, and 24 per cent in
Puerto Rico compared with 34 per cent in the United States and 36
