names of Max Scheler and Karl Mannheim. Roughly up to the middle
of the 19th century the evolution of "science" had been looked upon
as a purely intellectual process-as a sequence of explorations of the
empirically given universe or, as we may also put it, as a process of
filiation of discoveries or analytic ideas that went on, though no doubt
influencing social history and being influenced by it in many ways,
according to a law of its own. Marx was the first to turn this relation
of interdependence between "science" and other departments of social
history into a relation of dependence of the former on the objective
data of the social structure and in particular on the social location
of scientific workers that determines their outlook upon reality and
hence what they see of it and how they see it. This kind of relativism—
which must of course not be confused with any other kind of relativ-
ism³ if rigorously carried to its logical consequences spells a new
philosophy of science and a new definition of scientific truth. Even for
mathematics and logic and still more for physics, the scientific worker's
choice of problems and of approaches to them, hence the pattern of
an epoch's scientific thought, becomes socially conditioned-which is
precisely what we mean when speaking of scientific ideology rather
than of the ever more perfect perception of objective scientific truths.
Few will deny, however, that in the cases of logic, mathematics, and
physics the influence of ideological bias does not extend beyond that
choice of problems and approaches, that is to say, that the sociological
interpretation does not, at least for the last two or three centuries,
challenge the "objective truth" of the findings. This “objective truth"
may be, and currently is being, challenged on other grounds but not
on the ground that a given proposition is true only with reference to
the social location of the men who formulated it. To some extent at
least, this favorable situation may be accounted for by the fact that
logic, mathematics, physics and so on deal with experience that is
largely invariant to the observer's social location and practically in-
variant to historical change: for capitalist and proletarian, a falling
stone looks alike. The social sciences do not share this advantage. It
is possible, or so it seems, to challenge their findings not only on all
the grounds on which the propositions of all sciences may be challenged
but also on the additional one that they cannot convey more than a
writer's class affiliations and that, without reference to such class
affiliations, there is no room for the categories of true or false, hence
for the conception of "scientific advance" at all. Henceforth we adopt
I should consider it an insult to the intelligence of my readers to emphasize that in


#### Split:
particular this kind of relativism has nothing to do with Einsteinian relativity were it
not a fact that there actually are instances of this confusion in the philosophical literature
of our time. This has been pointed out to me by Professor Philipp Frank.