and labor circles to government intervention in the wageprice
field is stronger than elsewhere. And in general it would have
to be said that there is a distrust of governmental initiative in the
whole area of stabilization policy that is lacking in Western Europe
[4, p. 108].
How significant the absence of a wage-price policy is likely to be
for effective stabilization measures appears to me to depend principally
on two relatively unknown considerations. The first has to do with the
question whether the forces that in the period 1953-58 produced an
annual 3 per cent per man-hour increase in output, a 4½ per cent
increase per hour in total compensation, and a 2.1 per cent increase
in wholesale prices have significantly changed [3, p. 137]. That there
have been important changes bearing on this problem there can be no
doubt. The attitudes and expectation suggested by the phrase "inflation
as a way of life" have certainly suffered a severe blow. In a number
of basic industries which have hitherto been leaders in the wage
push a combination of relatively slow secular increase in output with
massive technological change having serious employment effects will
inevitably moderate wage demands. In the very important field of
national defense industries national security considerations tend inevitably
to damp both wage and price initiatives. Finally, persistence
of a serious balance-of-payments problem will force government intervention
in certain wage or price decisions regardless of labor or
business attutudes.
The second consideration has to do with whether an approach toward
fuller use of capacity will release, with increased investment,
that flood of technical improvements the expansionists foresee. It is
certainly quite possible, if the wage-price creep can be held to modest
proportions, that the competitive position of U.S. exports would be
improved rather than lessened by a closer approach to full employment.

However that may be, it is probably correct to say that the absence
of a national wage policy does and will continue significantly to affect
our stabilization policy. The effect is already clearly visible in the
current definition of full employment as 4 per cent unemployment.
The expectation of a wage-price creep helps to explain why full employment
does not enjoy the high priority in the stabilization trinity
of employment, price level, and balance of payments it appears to
enjoy in Western Europe. And it probably means that monetary and
fiscal measures will tend to be employed tentatively and step by step
pending a testing of wage and price effects.
The second major policy instrument that tends to be blunted by the
group interests and ideologies here under consideration is fiscal policy.