The American economy had the good fortune of having been inte-
grated at a very early stage. When the War of Independence came to an
end, the economic relations between the states resembled those of the
German states after the Congress of Vienna. Under the Articles of Con-
federation each of the 13 states of the Union pursued its own tariff
policy. But through the Constitution a huge free trade area for the
unimpeded movement of goods and services, of labor and capital was
created, which was surely a major factor in U.S. economic development.
On the Continent of Europe the major steps toward integrated
national economies were the economic unification of Germany through
the German Zollverein (1834) and the emergence of a unified Italian
state in 1861.
Alfred Marshall called the Zollverein "the most important move-
ment toward free trade that the world had ever seen, except the con-
temporary reform of the British fiscal system" [12, p. 399]. I think
Marshall was right, for from the political and historical standpoint,
if not from the economic one, national economic unification was an
indispensable prerequisite not only for the economic development of
the various countries concerned, but also for the growth of the world
economy. This remains true even though we now know that the hopes
and expectations so widely held in the mid-nineteenth century, that
national free trade and integration would lead in straight and un-
broken succession to world-wide free or near-free trade, were not ful-
filled. To question Marshall's judgment concerning the Zollverein on
the ground of the next hundred years of German history would imply
extreme and untenable historical determinism.
There is no doubt that the Italian unification did for the develop-
ment of the Italian economy as a whole what the German unification
did for the German economy. This would be true even if the widely
held theory were correct that the economic integration and internal
free trade caused a retardation of the economic development of the
Italian South as a region in an absolute sense, not merely relatively
to the more progressive North.
The German and Italian national economic integration was pre-
ceded and followed by similar movements in many other European
and overseas countries.
III. World-Wide Integration Through Freer Trade
While this was going on, the second wave of world-wide integration,
as I called it, started—namely, the free trade movement of the mid-
nineteenth century. It was spearheaded by Great Britain, but spread
widely (especially after 1860) to the Continent of Europe. Let me
briefly recall a few landmarks-abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846,