14
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
or physically nearby institutions. Its greatest value may lie in acquaint-
ing scholars from different academic fields with the language and ap-
proaches of the other disciplines. That is not without importance, but
is unsuited to public agencies needing prompt answers to practical ques-
tions and to economists in struggling institutions who have no estab-
lished reputations.
The idea underlying interdisciplinary research is sound. Questions of
public policy do not fall into the tight rubrics of academic disciplines.
For the answers to practical questions more than one and often many
academic disciplines need to be brought into the picture. There are no
hard and fast lines separating economics from politics, law, sociology,
psychology, and philosophy. Even technical matters, geographic facts,
and certainly the historical and institutional background need to be
taken into account by the economist seeking answers to practical
problems. Economics is not timeless and placeless and is more than an
exercise in logic or a mathematical problem. All social sciences blend
into each other, as in fact do all elements of our culture. Economics has
to do with the aspect of man concerned with the satisfaction of his
material wants. But it is ever the whole man who acts in economic
matters. To lose sight of this basic fact is but to grope for economic
truth in a way akin to the study of the elephant by the blind men of the
fable, not one of whom could get an even approximately correct picture
of the great animal.
How to get a broad over-all view which also has depth is the $64
question (or to use a more up-to-date analogy, the correct answer to the
final question which gives ownership to everything in the show). In my
article on institutional economics I took the position that the practical
economist needs to know his way about in all the social sciences, and that
in addition he should be broadly cultured, with some bent toward the
technical, in a mechanical age. I now recognize that this is a well-nigh
impossible prescription for economists in this complex age. Few, if any,
economists can be super Leonardo da Vincis, or Benjamin Franklins, or
Thomas Jeffersons-not to mention the wisdom of Lincoln.
I certainly do not propose that study of practical economic problems
should be restricted to supermen. Rather, I believe that every educated
person, specifically everybody who regards himself as an economist,
should interest himself in practical economic problems. While some
economists may do better with abstract, over-all problems, the great
majority will be well advised to deal with concrete questions which ap-
pear not to be too large for their capabilities and resources.
What is essential is not a mastery of all disciplines which may have
something to contribute to the solution of economic problems, but an
appreciation that economics does not afford all of the answers. This calls
