Concerning the empirical testing of theoretical conclusions, there
were issues of the validity of surveys through mailed questionnaires and
of the proper interpretation of responses to various types of questions
about managerial judgment. In the background of the whole controversy,
but undoubtedly of pervasive significance, was the comparative acceptability
of empirical findings to the effect that the elasticity of demand
for labor was virtually zero and of the conventional theoretical
inference that the elasticity was normally above zero.
Realizing how manifold were the issues of the controversy, one can
appreciate that no clear decision can be made about its outcome. Some
of the issues had been raised decades or centuries before 1946 and
were not decided in this confrontation one way or the other. Attacks
on the assumption of maximizing behavior and on the lack of realism
in price theory have occurred with great regularity ever since "economic
man” and similar postulates were introduced. The running battles
between the classical and the historical schools were largely on
these points. The Methodenstreit of 1883-84 dealt essentially with the
same issues. And in the United States, institutionalism may be seen as
a movement animated by the same spirit of protest against abstract
theory.
However, the particular form of explicit marginalism (under the
name of "theory of the firm") which became the target of the attacks
of 1939 and 1946 had only come into being in the 1930's-if one suppresses
the memory of the great master of 1838 [9]. Ironically, some
interpreter of recent history of economic thought-I have forgotten
who it was-regarded the 1933-34 versions of the theory of the firm
[8] [32] [41] as the theorists' concession to institutionalism, as
attempts to supplement the neoclassical model of the firm under atomistic
competition with some "more realistic" models allowing for a
greater variety of conditions. It was this theory of the profit-maximizing
firm in all sorts of market positions, in monopolistic and oligopolistic
competition as well as in pure and perfect competition, that
was attacked by the researchers in Oxford; and it was the marginalproductivity
principle in the explanation of the demand for labor on
the part of the individual firm that was the prime target of the attack
of 1946.
If the chief aim of the attack was to force the abandonment or subversion
of marginalism, and if the chief aim of the defense was to turn
back the subversive forces and secure the reign of marginalism once
and for all, then, to be sure, the war of 1946 ended in a draw. Look at
the textbooks and you will find that marginalism has continued to
dominate the teaching of microeconomics, perhaps though with occasional
reservations and references to current attempts at greater realism.