a day. Raise now the number of workmen to twenty and let the capital remain
the same and each man will create less than before. A day's product will be
3-X dollars. Each successive unit of labor employed in connection with a fixed
amount of pure capital produces less than any of its predecessors. . . . General
wages tend to be equal to the actual product created by the last laborer that
is added to the social working force.6

The earnings of capital are subject to identically the same law as those of
labor; they are fixed by the product of the last increment that is brought into
the field. . . . Let the labor supply remain fixed and let capital increase and
each increment of the latter, as it enters the productive field finds that it can
create less than any of its predecessors. The general law of diminishing returns
is two-sided."

During the next decade Clark completed his theory in a series of
subtle articles, and in 1899 gave it final expression in his book The
Distribution of Wealth.

In the meantime, in 1894, the extraordinarily gifted Philip Wicksteed
showed in his pathbreaking little essay, The Coordination of the Laws
of Distribution, that if production were characterized by a homogeneous
linear function of the first degree (that is, if when each and
all of the factors of production were doubled or tripled, product would
increase in the same proportion), then with each factor receiving its
marginal product, the total product would be absorbed in payments to
the factors without either surplus or deficit. This essay of Wicksteed's
fluttered the mathematical dovecotes. Edgeworth, who in his Mathematical
Psychics, had attempted to prove, by quotations from Owen
Meredith's Lucille, that men should receive larger incomes than women,
now dismissed with elegant irony the theory that production followed
a homogeneous linear function. Pareto's attempted refutation was
almost pure sophistry in which, by limiting the market, he sought to
prove that product would not increase in proportion to the factors.
It remained for Wicksell to give the most sensible treatment of this
subject when he pointed out that while the homogeneous production
function could not be expected to apply over the whole range of output
within a plant, nevertheless under perfect competition, each firm would
tend to carry its scale of output to the point where neither increasing
nor decreasing returns prevailed but where instead the rate of return
was constant. Since industries were merely aggregates of firms and
the economy as a whole was an aggregate of industries, it was presumed
that the linear function tended, therefore, to be true of society




#### Split:

8

6 Publications, American Economic Association (Mar., 1889), p. 49.
Ibid., p. 53.

8 Knut Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy, Vol. I, pp. 101-33.