they may individually become too much worn for further
circulation, after performing, it may be a hundred, it may
be a thousand, exchanges. Bank deposits, or bankers' liabilities,
are not money. Inscribed on the books of the
bank itself, divided into no definite parts, constituting no
tangible thing, having no outside course to run, with no
separate, identifiable existence, they are not money: they
are simply an instrumentality for saving the use of money.
As such, it would be impossible to overrate their importance;
but that is no reason for attributing to them a
character which thev do not bear. Their real nature and
function more clearly appears, it seems to me, when they
are spoken of as an instrument for the cancellation of indebtedness
than when they are characterized as money.
To my mind, it is of importance to recognize, as among the
signs of all true money, its circulation; its passing from
hand to hand throughout the community; its leaving no
trace or record behind it as it goes, indebtedness being discharged,
or goods paid for, every time it changes hands.
Let us now pass to the final and last stage of our journey.
It is only with reference to the point now approached
that this paper has any significance, since thus
far nothing new has been sought to be presented. Let us
now suppose that credit has grown to enormous dimensions,
and that, by consequence, the banking system, the
check system, and the clearing-house system have been
carried to what seem to be the limits of their possibilities.
Vast volumes of indebtedness are daily cancelled in each
bank, while but a small amount of coin and notes together
is made use of in these transactions. At the clearing
house the undischarged balances of a score or two of
banks are every afternoon brought together and settled,
with a use of coin and notes even smaller still. Now is
there anything in such a situation which in any degree impairs
the validity of the proposition that it is, after all, the
demand for and the supply of the actual coin and notes