mankind. But most men have mixed motives; they feel
the itch of social ambition, they love power and control;
they respond also to the call for public spirit. There is
enough of public spirit and of genuine altruism to contribute
effectively to the solution of our social and economic
problems. When we add the gratification from
public fame and a place in history, we may feel reasonably
sure that, for a considerable proportion of those
who have the gifts of leadership, the attractions of public
service are powerful enough. Given opportunity for
the exercise of these gifts of leadership, and leaders of
the right stamp will not be lacking.

I say, given opportunity; for here seems to be the
greatest difficulty of the case. The love of distinction
can be gratified, and the sense of duty will strengthen
devotion to the general good. But the case is much
less hopeful as to the other motives which affect the industrial
captain. The desire for continuous activity and
rounded achievement, still more the passion for domination,
are not easily satisfied under the conditions of
public service in a democracy. Here are some aspects
of our problem which deserve attentive consideration.
Let us look first at some of the peculiarities of the
political machinery of our own country. Its familiar
characteristic is the system of checks and balances.
The fear of usurpation by the executive was the natural
fruit of the experience of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries; hence the hedging of his power, and the
strict line of demarcation between the functions of the
executive, the legislature, and the judiciary. This
principle, suggested by the example of England and the
experience of the colonies, has its most conspicuous application
in the Constitution of the United States, and
prevails no less in the governments of the several states
and of the cities. Throughout we find the same interwoven
authority, the same divided responsibility, the
same checks to any steady sweep of power. The
executive is sharply separated from the legislature