standpoint of libertyw tllere CAll be no dollbt wllatever
about tllis principle. Yet it is easy for cc)lltl-act to abl-ogate
the rigllt of cot,ltract. \Allle1lever a Inal1 colatracts
hilMSelf illtO t-1 COnditiOIl of virtual slavery, tlwis is tlle
case. I llave already cited the xvell-k1lorlln cases brought
before J udge Bennett of Soutll Carolina. Cases have
arisen in Germany, under *Nrlnat is called tile "coznpetitive
clause " of labor contracts. It seellls that there it is
quite ctlstcxmary to insist llpOtl a contract Witil an employee,
learni1ag a travle or occUpAtion, tilAt 1lt Sllall not'
after he hAs aCqUil-ed lliS lirilOR\7ledoe Of tlle 5LlSineSS,
eIlter into competitioll witll his employer. Sometiines
there is a limitation UpO11 tlle period or area vitllin
wllicll 1lo competition must be attemptecl, 1laakitlg the
clause a fairly reasonable c)ne. Sometimes, however, a
lad utterly incompetent to contzeInplate the remote COt]-
sequences of lliD act, alld not liaxtillC five dollars tc) his
name, will agree uncler a pellalty of perllaps several
thousand dollars not to enter illtO cornpetition R7ith his
employer duritlg llis Xrllole life, or itl tlle e1lsil-e German
empire, alld sometimes it is said, not allyR;here in the
svorlcl. VV]len contracts are carefully sc1-utinized rith
respect to tlleir impairment, directly o1- indirectly, of the
ritllt to zanake future colltracts, it xvill be foulad tllat
many regulations are 1zecessary ill tlle itaterests of liberty.
Contracting-out as it is 110u7 tecllNically callerl, OC1S
an interestitlg illust1 ation of the ahsolute necessity of
limitations upon contt-act in tlle illterests of pub]ic policy.
It rN;ill readily be conceded tllat prisrate coiltract Inust
not stand above public policy, and y et throug-h colltractiilg-
out of oblibations public policy 1nay frequ ently, atld
will freqelently be subverted. Let us suppose it is determined
to be public lDolicy, as it llas beell determined in
Germany and in Englalld, that accidents to employees,
unle.Ss brought abolIt t?y sZilful act of tlle eInpl(zyee, silall
be regarded as a part of tllz- expellses of mantlfacturillg