trial lars to be effective must deal vith them as they
e>cist in classes. And, moreover, no class exists for
itself. As society becomes real and vitcal, and mecans
more and more to tIS all, it becomes app)at-ent that no one
class exists for itself, an cl tllat no one class can exist
apart from all other clclsse<;. YVhile tllere is sucl] a tlling
as vicious legislation in behalf of a fesT favored individuals,
hatever promotes tl-le illterests of any one of the great
alld ntlmerous classes ill society, eitller itl rncltters physical,
melltal, moral or spiritual, advance, tlle interests of
evel-y othel class. '; RiVe are members Otle of a1lotller," and
" tl-le eye cannot say UlltO the hand, I llave no need of
thee: IlOi- again the head to the feet, I laave no neecl of
you aIld wrlletller one metuber sufi-ers, all tlle
membel-s suffer witll it: or one n-lember be hollored all
tIae In embers rej oice xvitll it " . Tll e apoqtle- Paul gives in
in these srlords an expreCsioil to ca deep prillciple of modern
illdllstricll society, the princilDle of social solidarity.
I llcave sketched tll us hastily ca theory of illdustria
liberty. What I llave said, I wotlld llave looked LIpO]l
as thougllts oll industrial liberty, mol-e or less closely
eo1lnectecl. I have not even attempted an exllaustive
treatmetlt, for hich m+ time is coo lirnitecl, evell hcld 1[:,
as I llave not, the wisdom for a complete preszntatiotl.
I trust, llowe.vcJr, tllat what I hclve preSented is in
harmony sVitTl indtlstricll evolutioll a11(J trtltn. It is
sometllillg, at atly 1-ate, if I llave at least made it clea.r
that indtlstl-ial liberty is a conceptioll laaving a relative
and not an absolute value; that it is to be collceivecl in
a poxitive latl-ler tllan in a negative sense; that it is olOt
sometlling svllich can be decreed off-lland, by any lebis
lative body, but ratller tllat it is a social product, to be
achieved by individuals worki1lg 50cially tOgetller, alld
that it comes, llOt all at once, but slovly as tlle result of
a long continued atld arduous process. It is IlOt the beginning
of social evolution, but ratller one of tlle goals