our methods of municipal government. A succession of
new charters for our cities bears witness to the consciousness
of existing defects. The trend in all these experiments
is the same. The chief administrators, and
especially the mayors, have longer terms, and greater
power and responsibility. More officers are appointed
by them, less are elected by popular vote. The municipal
legislature is restricted to the business of legislation,
and the administration of affairs is taken away from
its cumbrous and irresponsible committees. Even
where the general system is not modified, or is modified
only half-way, parts of the machinery are adjusted on
the same principle. When a particular thing is to be
done,-the building of a rapid-transit roadbed or tunnel,
the development of a park-system, the construction of
water-works,-the task is often put into the hands of a
'Commission, with a long term and unhampered powers.
It is familiar experience that men of administrative
capacity can be more easily secured for such Commissions
than for the routine posts in state or municipal
service. The explanation is clear: there is opportunity
for uninterrupted activity and successful achievement.
The more such opportunities we have in political
life, the more shall we attract men of power to public
service.

It need hardly be said that it is neither possible nor
desirable to secure in public service so complete a concentration
of power and responsibility as is common in
our large industrial enterprises. I have pointed out defects
in the system of checks and balances, but I would
not be supposed to advocate an unending succession of
dictatorships. We have had too much of dictatorship in
corporate enterprises, and not enough of checks and balances.
Certainly in public affairs it is a question not of
whether or no, but of more or less. Some limitation of
the powers of the executive we must have, if democracy
is to be more than a form. Hence, the instinct for mastery
can never find satisfaction so fully in a democracy