Britain. Admission to the shining ranks of the upper
class has been the dream of every Briton; wealth, if
piled high enough, has been, next to martial renown, the
surest means of securing entrance. This materialization
of the British aristocracy has unquestionably had a
powerful effect on the activities of the business class. It
has served to promote enterprise, invention and the accumulation
of capital, and has been no small factor in
bringing about that industrial leadership which Great
Britain retained through the nineteenth century. The
same influences have shown themselves in other countries,
tardily at first, but with gathering strength during
the last generation or two. In the United States, in the
absence of hereditary dignities and titles, wealth became
naturally the main avenue to social distinction. Here,
as in Great Britain, it has sometimes taken a generation
or two before the desired goal was attained; but admission
to the set which deems itself exclusive has been attained
by the millionaire's children, or at all events by his
later descendants.
It is not easy to say just in what way and to what degree
the love of distinction in this form affects the captain
of industry. Are the ceremonies and extravagances
of conventional society per se sources of pleasure to the
successful man of affairs ? Or are they valued as symbols
of place and power, external evidences of the attainment
of a distinguished station? These are questions which
the self-made rich man would himself often find it difficult
to answer. Like all of us, he follows the paths of
emulation and imitation marked out for him by the rest
of the world. Perhaps it is not this form of distinction,
but merely distinction in some form, that spurs him;
a doubt which we could solve only if we could try
the experiment of removing all the silly ostentation, and
leaving only a ribbon, a laurel-wreath, for the man who
had guided with success the wealth-making forces of
society. We may infer, indeed, from some things in
every day observation that it is the wives and children