cured in still greater degree. Is it conceivable that he
who directs an industrial enterprise with success and
thereby gains a fortune, may be induced to labor with
equal zeal and efficiency in public business ? Can the
love of distinction and the passion for domination not
be satisfied in other ways than those we are now familiar
with? Can the great capacities of the captain of industry
be turned directly and unquestionably to the
general good, without the bribe of a fortune and of
power thinly veiled and lightly trammeled ?
Clear it is that the modern community needs the
services of strong industrial leaders. We cannot foresee
how great will be the extension of the functions of
government in the next two or three generations; but
that they will extend measurably, perhaps largely, there
can be no doubt. Public works even in their accepted
-routine-schools, streets, sewers, water supply, lighting,
the post,-become more complicated and call for a
higher order of management. I have little faith in the
theorem that the sphere of the state must of necessity
broaden, and I should hesitate long before venturing
on a prediction as to the extent to which its operations
will be enlarged in this century. But enlargement in
some degree, great or small, is certain. Most certain
of all it is that some at least of the great industries of
modern times would be carried on to greater advantage
for the community if conducted as public enterprises
under able management. Here is the essence of the
problem: can able management be secured? In the
past, there has been found no spur to industrial efficiency
equal to that from the magic of property, with all the
freedom, elasticity, power which flow from unfettered
ownership. Can we find in the future, under public
ownership, any stimulus comparable to this ?
Reverting now to our analysis of the motives for
money-making, I fear we must face the fact that the
most widespread and perhaps most powerful of these
motives can not be easily turned to the aid of public