llberty llleans the explessioIl of positixTe pORVelS of tlle
illdiViClllal, allcl tllat it Call be reaclled ollly cls a result
of a long ancl tstrclllous collstrtlctive process. Green tells
zIS ill these xrorcls what lle lneatls by li4erty orfreeclotn:
" We do llot llleall onerelv fleecloll-l from restraint or
comptllsioll. 5Ale clo not lizeaxl lllerel fl-eeclozn to do as
we like irrespectivrely of wllat it is tllat we like. We
do not llleall a freec10on that cAn be elljoaTed by one lllan,
or orle set of tnell, at tlle cost of a loss of freedom to
otllers. Wllell we speak of freedoul as somethillt,- to be
higllly prizee1, we lnean a positive power or capacity of
doitlt, o1 enjoyillg solnetllillt, wortll doitlg or elljoying,
aold tllat, too, solnetlaillg tl]at we clo ol elljoy in colnmon
witll others. \Ale llleall by it a zower wllich each tllan
exelcises througll the l-lelp ol secllrity given hioll hy his
fellowtlle2l, allcl -ullicll lle ill turll 1lellDs to secure for
tllelll. W}lell we lloeasure the progress of a .<ociety by
tl-ze growtll ill freecloul, re naeastlre it ly tlle illcreasillg,
developmetlt allcl exercise o]l tlle whole of tllose poJers
of contrib.lting to social good -witll wllicll we believe
the zzlember.s of tlle societ) to be endoxvecl; ill sllort,
by tlle >reattr power oll tlle part of tlle citizells as a
bocler to lnake tlae lnOSt and best of tllelllfselxres."
Ais anal-clar gives 11s tl-le logical outcollle of one line
of tllought concerllint, liberty, so we find allotller lille
of ttzollgllt, regarclillg libert, going far beyond the
necessary iz;-lzlications of Green's pOSitiOIl alld terlMinatillg
ill tlle fDppOSite eNtrelne, SOCialiSTll.
As i'&dAnl SlllitlI 'S XlD4lilOSOphy Of liberty is atl expresSiOll
of the ei>-llteellth cetltllry, Tholuas Hill Greell's
view xuay l)e lookecl upon as all expression of the
philosopllyr of liberty with nThich tl-le twentieth century
opens. There are szarious reasolls for this change vf
view. One of tlle most fundamental is, perhaps, found