as a natul-al plaee to fincl aid and eomfort. It is ollly
allother formlllation of the same proposition, a sort of
synthesis, so to speak, of these two elements, when we
say it is the ollteollle of a rising standard of edueation in
gel]eral in the colnlllUtlity at large, alld of all inereasing
lDelief in tlle value of a speeial, teellriieal, professiollal
edueation in all departlllellts in N7hieh sueh training ean
be of use.

TIle general tetldelley tlltls deseribecl l-las sllowll
itself of late in all eivilizecl eoulltries alike; England,
Franee, Gerlnany, Belgillm, Austria, ete. The new
Teaelling Ulliversitr of :Lollclon llas reeognized the
existellee of this lleed ill moclerll Etlglish soeiety alld
provicled for its satisfaetioll by establishing a separate
allcl cli.stinet faelllty.2

TIle U^niversity of I+eipsie llas approvecl tlle experiD
lnellt by aeeordill, a valuable alld strikil-]g reeot,nition
to tllis lllovement.3

Belgillnl has giell tlle Inoxrelllellt a legal statlls by
provicling for sellools of Colllluercial Seiellees ill tvvo or
tllree of its universitie.s, allel by raising tlle Colnollereial
Institute of Alltwerp to the rallk of a Ulliversity Faeulty.4
1 Cf. llo. to in list of ulonographs, etc., l-elatilng to comlllel-cial
educalioll appellcled to this article.

2 The Univel-sitJ7 of London Act of I898 ancl the Statutes made for
the Uiliversity of London by the Conlulissiollers appoillted under the
said act (prizIted Fehrtlartr I6, I900), provide for a special Faculty of
Econonlics alld Political Sciellce (includillg conlmerce and industry).
Tl-Lis faculty in its oz-igillal forlll consisted of tell members.
Cf. also Regulatiolis ulade for the Univea-sity of Lonclon by the
Colllmissiollers ullder tlle University of Londoll Act of I898. (Printed
MAl-Ch I st, I 900 ) .

3 Cf Erster Jahresbericht der Ha.lldelshochschule zu Leipzig.
Leipzig I899.

4 Cf. Ecole des Sciences Commerciales et Consttlaires. Universite
Catholique de Lvuvaill. Louvain I900. Also: Universite de Lieges
Bstraits des dispositiolls legislatives, etc. Liege I900. (page 57).