for society as a whole. But for the limited section of
society which we now have in mind, this factor can play
no great part. An income very modest in the eyes of
modern fortune-seeking suffices for all essentials. Much
more than this is sought by the would-be captain of
industry; and to understand the springs of his doings we
must consider chiefly the other motives.
Far more effective is the desire for distinction, a
motive so all-pervading that, like the pressure of the air,
it acts on us without our being conscious of its power.
Much that we might be disposed to ascribe to the love
of material ease is but a manifestation of the desire for
distinction: as in our clothing, our houses, even our food.
It belongs among the primary human impulses; it shows
itself in the earliest stages of tribal life, and seems to
gather strength as society advances to more complex
stages. It persists in defiance of all the principles and
traditions of democracy. So wide-reaching and ineradicable
is it that the social reformer must perforce reckon
with it. We can not hope to root it out, even should
we desire to do so. All that can be expected is to modify
its growth, and cause it to develop in ways helpful for
the common welfare.

Doubtless the form of the love of distinction which is
most widely felt is the desire for social superiority,-
using the word social in its narrow conventional sense.
Each layer in society deems itself better than that below,
and wishes to be as well thought of as that above. Each
set decks itself with those outward symbols, from
starched linen to stately mansions, which proclaim to the
onlooker what stage of worldly advancement has been
attained. The snobbery of the race, however flouted by
the satirist, persists in undiminished strength. And this
is a factor of the first importance in the economic world.
It is a prime motive for the accumulation of wealth, and
so for the increase of the community's capital.
The recognition of wealth as sufficient in itself to accredit
the owner in the social scale came first in Great