easons. Olle is the progressive eharaeter of the state,
^.1. to gelleral ellliglltenment; anotller is tlle altrllistie
.pxrit of the age, wliiell finds suell oSratifyillg expressio
the Old Bay state, alld a third is tlle faet of its lligl
dustrial development, as a result of wllicll it llas llacl
3 r deal for a longer period tllan other states ritll tllose
questions growilag out of an intelasive illdustrial life.
Reeently, howeer, to states, viz., Tenlaessee ala(t West
Virginia, itldustriallwr far less developed, llave takell a
leadillg po.sition in tlle regulatioll of eontraet ill the
itlterests of libertz trtlly eoneeived. I refer to tlle
deeisions of tlle eourts of these states, sustaining statutes
prohibiting the lnaintellallee of trllek sllops, and also
providitlg for weigllillg of eoal. the eourts elearly
reeognize inequalities ill baraainillg porer, 157ilag baek
of eontraet, and tlley also take tlle pOSitiOzz,-ancR it is undoubtedly
a true one,-that wise legislatiotl of tllis sort is
ealeulated to prevent illdustrial strife, disorder and
bloodshed, and to maintain the publie peaee.l
Tlle au,ust tribunal whieh holds its sessioll ill tllis
eity, the Suprellle Court of the Ullited States, llas also,
OI1 broad grounds of publie policy, 1lpllelcl tlle statute of
tlle state of Utall, wllieh limits tlle x^Torking day £or
mitlers in tllat state to eight llours.2 TIle Supreme
Court dicl not go into tlle wisdotll of this partietllar
statute, and I llave no desire to clo so ola this oceasiool.
It is silnply tlle broad prineiple of regulation of eeollomie
relations ill the illterests of freeclolll rhicll is in
question. We see tlle most enlightelled eourts tllus enmists
and sociologists are the people to sTholll sve otlght to turIl more
thala ve do for illstruction irl the groullds and foutldatioIls of all
ratiollal decisions."
1 Harrison v. Knoxville Iron Co., 53 S. RV. Rep. 955 (Telln. ). Peel
Splint Coal Co. v. State, I5 S. E. Rep. ( 5vV. Va. ) IOOO.
2Holden v. Hardy, I69, U. S. 397.