the response which it has met from kindred feelings in
the hearts of men from time immemorial. Alexander,
Caesar, Napoleon, and the whole host of lesser
heroes, have aroused the admiration which all the world
feels for the subjugator. Most of what we know of
history is one long sad tale of sanguinary aggression, of
unceasing struggle by each prince and princeling for
more territory and more vassals, and running through
it all, the glorification of adventure, power, and conquest.
Something of the satisfaction which the captain of
armies has felt, is felt also by the modern captain of industry.
His is a figure as familiar to the modern world
as that of the martial leader has always been, and it is
hardly less admired. He too lords it over thousands and
tens of thousands, and finds gratification for the passion
of mastery as well as for the love of distinction. What
part these two motives, so closely associated, play in the
doings of the fortune-builder, he is himself hardly conscious.
He strives for that which is striven for by his
associates. Among these-in the hierarchy, sacred to
our plutocracy, of the " big men " in the business world
-we can see often no explanation of the incessant striving
and scheming which does not take into account the
passion for domination. The great captain of industry,
with millions of money at his command, has under his
sway a vast complex of men, of interwoven enterprises
and industries, of towns, cities, even of states. To a degree
which we are hardly aware of, but which he himself
appreciates but too well, he is the power behind the
throne in the political life of our boasted democracy. In
the business sphere he is the acknowledged leader, before
whom men bow and cringe, and of whom they speak with
bated breath.
The worship of wealth and of the rich man has often
been the object of satire and of blame; and similarly the
motives which we have just considered,-the love of distinction
in its snobbish forms, and the passion for industrial
mastery,-have been roundly condemned. Yet it