mostmen of the type we are now cheifly considering,
take pleasure in rounded achievement. To one who has
the capacity for management, there is a strong satisfaction
in so administering a complex enterprise that every
part of the mechanism does its work properly, or in
carrying a long continued chain of operations successfully
to the end. The pleasure is like that of the mechanic
in a neat job, of the scholar in a conclusive investigation.
It adds zest to the impulse for activity, and may maintain
activity long after the motives by which labor was
first impelled have ceased to operate.
Last among the motives to which I shall advert is the
love of power. No doubt this passion, like the others
which we have been considering, is not to be regarded
as standing by itself. Only in extreme cases can it be
observed as separately in action. Desire to command
the service of others is obviously one of its sources, and the
love of ease and the aversion to labor contribute to it.
The love of distinction is commonly associated with it.
But here again the question arises why the love of distinction
should take this particular direction; which it
can do only if mankind commonly admire and emulate
the successful exercise of the power of subjugation.
In its brutal forms, the passion for domination is observable,
alas, through almost the entire sweep of history.
We may speculate that it is an outgrowth, a result by
natural selection, of that warfare between contending
races which Malthus illustrated so plentifully in the later
and less familiar chapters of the Essay on Population.
We can hardly doubt that the brute instinct for slaughter
and destruction, which crops out so easily even in our
society of peaceful industry, is an inheritance from the
primal days of the race, when man shared with the rest
of organic life the relentless struggle for existence. Similarly
we may guess the passion for mastery to be the outcome
of the same sort of struggle between the over-peopling
groups and races of men. Whatever its origin, there
can be no question as to its strength and persistence, or