wolllcl have perisaled, atlcl that tllese weak individllals
may take part in tlle propagation of the species, eventually
leaving behilld an enfeeblecl progelay. Bllt with
all its milcllless, civilizatioll lessells tlnfit reprodllction,
allcl, llpon the nvhole, cloe.s so to all ever-ilacreasing extellt.
It plltS tlle feeble-minded in aswlums, alld cliscourages
tlle Inarl-iage of paupers; vllile in its llew attitucle
towarcls tl-le crimillal classes it shoNrs an increasilog
inclillation to cletain thelll ulltil it receives ex idellce
tllat tlleir malacly is curecl. AXIol-eover, by sanitatioll
anct other lneasllres, luoderll cinrilization il-lcreases tl-le
stren<$-tll al-lcl vigor of tllose Nllo do survive. Conlparisons
of civilizecl lllen witll sasZages ancl xTVritll semi-civilizecl
peoples, rexreal tlle sllperiority of the foruler in
physical vigor. It is prolalDle that never in the world's
llistory llave tllere been mell allcl women whose aerage
of efficiellt strellgth in tlle ecollolllic spllere was so great
as tllat of tlle lllell ancl srolnell wllo toclay inllabit German,
Blltlancl, allcl tlle Ullitecl States of America.
Competitioll is tlle cllief selective process in uloclern
ecollolnic society, ancl tllrollt,-h it we lla;e the surxistal
of tlle fit. But s^tllat clo ve llleall by " tlle fit " ? Msle
all knosar toclay that fitness 1laS reference silnply to conditiolls
of a particlllar time alld place. Bold and aggressive
pirates avere at olle tinle fit -for survival9 but
no^r tlley are likely to coone to an 1lntimely alld i-llomilliolls
encl. AIoderll society itself establislles, consciollsly
or uncollsciollsly, nlany of the conditions of the
struggle for existence, ancl it is for societr to create sllch
economic conditiolls that otlly desirable social qualities
shall collstitllte elllillent fitlaess for survival. A kind of
society is possilDle, ill wllicll the beggar llas tllis fitlless,
svhile the conditions in another society nlay be most Ullfavorable
to the growth of parasitical classes.

Tlle socially established competitive metllods and the