and children's children of the self-made man who care
chiefly for the frippery of wealth. Often he is said to
be, for himself, indifferent to these baubles, even averse
to them. In the infinite shades of variety in human
nature, many no doubt get a real zest of enjoyment from
the paraphernalia of riches, while as many more go
through the motions with weary impatience. But it is
probable that in all cases there is some admixture of
other motives; and in many cases doubtless there is a
preponderance of other motives.
Among these other motives, we may next consider the
impulse for activity: the inevitable wish of the active
and healthy man to be up and doing. Sports and recreation
pall, when pursued not to vary the work of the
world, but as occupations in themselves. A fortunate
few only can find a resource in creative intellectual work.
Your business man, however successful in business, has
commonly no marked aptitudes in other directions, and
has no other resource than to go on with business. He
continues to scheme and work largely from the need of
giving vent to his energies. No other occupation is so
interesting and absorbing as money-making; at all events
no other is so easily entered. Hence many a man who
has accumulated what he once thought quite enough,
continues to accumulate more, and piles riches on
riches, from the mere negative motive that he must do
this or nothing. And doubtless, where such is the case,
the conventional extravagances of the very rich give
some added flavor, from the gratification of the love of
distinction in its snobbish form; even though this
gratification would have been quite inadequate of itself
to induce the exertion.
We must reckon as part of the same impulse, or as one
closely allied, the satisfaction which comes from achievement.
We need not go into psychological refinements,-
there may or may not be, as has been suggested by some
thinkers, an ancient and deep-rooted instinct for workmanship.
Certain it is that many men, and probably