socially establisllecl ellds to be attailled b5J competition
deterluille tlle kincl of mell wllo will sllrvive il] COlllpetitioll.
Let lne offer an illustratioll. To-clay the
civil service of tlle llloclerll nation fllrllislles all opportzlIlity
for a livelilloocl to a coIlsiclerable percelltat,e of
tl-le population. Colllpetition for adlnissioll to tlle civil
service ill orcler tllerebv to secure a support is fsDllud
wllen ore llave tlle so-callecl spoils s) stem, ancl tlle CON1-
petitioll is illtense allcl frequelltly bitter. Tllis coonpetiti
5.7e COllteSt iSSlleS ill tlle stlrival of lnen witll qllalities
lcnowll to llS all. Civil service reforul does .lOt remove
colllpetitioll; oll tlle cos]trary it extellels coltlpetil;ioll,
hll-t the dift'erence ill metllocls proclllces corresponclilzg
differellces in reslllts. Oll tlle olle llallel, the extension
of colnpetition lessells bitterlless, because it is luore in
in collsonallce with otlr etllical dellland :For equality of
o?portllllity, allcl the clifference in colnpetitive tests for
succes;s, issues in tlle stlrvirral of nlen with qllalities of
allotller sort froln tllose wllicll collle to tlle top utacler
tll£ spoils sstelll, ancl witll qualities, luost of lls will
sa, of a lligller killel.
Cotnpetitioll increasingly comes to mean worthy
strllggle, and trlle progress implies tllat sllccess will be
secllred llel-eafter b5J collfornlity to lligller ancl ever
hig-ller, l]obler alld ever jlobler icleas.
SiTr..@lfrecl Rlls.sel \Alullace alad Professor Ivester F.
WAlarcl llave called attelltioll to the sl1periority of man's
selectioll to llatt-lre's selectiool. Professor Ward has
tllUS e=xpressed tlle idea: " The ecollolllics of natllre
COllSiStS, tllel-efOl-e, eSSelltially ill the operatioll of tlle
law of colllpetitioll ill its pllrest forln. The prevailing
iclea, llosrever, that it is tl-le fittest possible that survive
in tllis strllggle is wholly false. Tlle effect of competitiOll
iS to prevellt ally form frolll attaillillg its lnaxinlum
developlllellt, and to mailltain a colllparatively low