57
thl1siastic political ecollol1list write an epic 01l ' Slle
Colusecratioll of Cailnibalistll' 9 ' 1
Oll tlle otller llallcl listetl to Lllese worcls by a sturcly
Alnericall wlzose coul-age ill delatonciatioll of wrolzg in
lait,-ll places no ol-we cail l-iglltly ilnpl1gll:
" Tlle colllpetitioll of eco11olloies is 1lOt tlle so-callec1
coml)>titiotl of our breat cellters svllere lnell strive to
drive lllel-l to tlle srall, l)ut tl-le coollpesitioll wllich leaves
eacll in fl1ll possessiotl of tllat proc1toctive power nvllicl
best Illlites his labol- nvitll tlze labor of otllers.
Colnpetitiolo is 1]0 mol-e trespass tllaol it is tlleft. 1:t i
tlle recollciliatioll of me;l in tllose productive proD
cesses wllicll issl1e in tile lart,-e.st a^,gregate of wealth.
It is 1lOt crowcliIlg lnel-l oaff tlleir feet, btlt a means of
platitilig 11e1I1 llpOll tl-leir feet." q
T1lese ql1otatio1ls colold be nat1ltiplied i1ldefinitely on
tlle ol-e sicle alld 01l tlle otller. AVe IS1ld it asserted on
tlae o1ze laand tlaat colupetitiotl is slnft1l warfale; tllat
it is iicliisiokl distonion, every lllan for l-lilnself, every
mal1 ao-aiast llis brotl1er "; 3 O11 tlle otl1er haz1d tllat it is
lnutual service; tllat it is altrtliDlll of a .superiol- quality;
tl1at it is tt1e essenee of the golclel1 lllle; tl1at it is loving
our neiglll:)or as ollrselves ill otller A7ord.s, that a correet
rellderi nt, of Cllristian love is eolllpetition . 4
Apparently sllell eolltl-aclietory views admit of no
eeolleiliatioll. But whell we think seriously about tile
matter, we al-e foreecl to ask ourselves tl1e qllestion:
llow is it possible tl1at men of ulldoubted eapaeity, of
utlqtlestiolled sineerity, of warm enthusiasm for l1unallitr'
eala hold views respeeting eompetition, tllis
1 Cllal-les Kingsley in Cheap Clothes and Nasty, printed with Alton
Locke, vol i, pp. 82-3.
2 John BASCOln 011 The Moral Disciplille of Busilless. Tke Xingdo>
MilllleapOliS, NIAy, I896.
3 Kingsley, 1. c., p. I04.
4 Edward AtlSinson on Cooperative Cotnpetition. EMze lMew WorZds
Septelilber, I895.