the grist, or transactions the non-existence of which
would impair production and legitimate trade.
Secondly, while the speakers and writers in question
dwell with so much emphasis on the fact that, of the
transactions of Sir John Lubbock's bank, only three per
cent. were settled with cash, and that, in a certain clearing
house, only a half of one per cent. of the business was
adjusted in the same way, they inadvertently fail to call
the attention of their hearers or readers to the fact that, in
spite of barter and in spite of credit, a very large part, in
most countries by far the largest part, in many countries
almost the whole, of retail trade is still conducted with the
use of money; and this is, after all, the vital thing. It
would not in the least matter, for the purpose of deciding
the question, what determines the value of money, if the
cancellation of indebtedness in the wholesale trade were
complete, if Sir John Lubbock found additional commercial
paper to take the place of that unhappy last three per
cent., and if every claim made by every bank, every afternoon,
at the clearing house were offset by an equal and
incontestable demand. The statistics of banking and
clearing-house transactions would be irrelevant and impertinent
to the issue, even were they not inflated, as has been
indicated. In the field of wages and of retail trade, money
gets that room to operate which enables it to determine
prices, just as truly as if banks and clearing houses did not
exist. In our own country the every-day agency of money
is somewhat obscured by the enormous extension of the
check system, by which small bills are often paid. But
even in England, whose credit and banking organization
is in all other respects far more perfect than our own, such
a use of checks is almost unknown. Beyond England and
the United States, no other country in the world to any
extent employs this method of buying goods or paying
bills for ordinary personal or domestic expenditures. But,
even if the field of cash payments were far more enbroached