I 62

celebration, tlle chief purpose of tlle university or eolle-
e is not tlle imparting of inforlnation or tlle gis7ing
of a special or technical traillillgortlledeveloplllent of
scholars, bllt the secllring of tllat breacith of view and
wiclellecl sylnpatlly wllicll is the result of the personal
illtercotlrse of tllollsands of young meJl tTlrotlgll a period
of thl-ee or four years vlllcler college azad university inflllence,
how vastly will tl-lis illflllellee for good ill ever
direction be strellgthened alld incre-asecl, wllel-l in acl
ditioll to tlle hllllclrecRs of lotllag l-nell ill our colleges llOW
preparing for tlle professions we shall llave otlle- lllln
dreds preparillg for coulonercial life. Alld this will sllrely
be the case if tlle ulliversi tie.s recogIlize tlleir duties
towarcl tllis great and growing class of our colllmtlIlity.
If tl-le bllsiness classes are destined to llave all ever-increasillg
illflllellce in ollr society 110W llecessary it is for
pllblic urelfare tllat as ollany melllbers of these clas.ses as
possible sllall corne ullcler tlle influence, for a longer or
shorter tilne, of those great forces wllich make llp ourmoclern
llnivelsity !

N0TH I.

THb =tVHARTON SCHOOW OF FINANCE AND ECON=OWIY.
The \Mhartoll School was foull(led in I88I. Its course ss7as at first
only two years, be^,inlling n7ith the jullior year in college. Its curriculllm
sn7as colnpo.sed largely of the ordinary college subjects tau<ght
by ulen alreacly appoillted to teach ila the uIliversity. The e:xperilIlellt
naturallT failed, and there was talk of halldillg back the endowmellt
to Mr. Wharton, oll the grotlnd that there seelned to be no special demand
for such illstructioll. It was decide(l, however, to nlake a llew
departul-e. Albel t S. Bolles was appoillted Professor of Mercantile
Law and Practice, in FebNzary, I883, and entrusted ssrith the organization
of the departmellt; RolDert E,llis Tllorllsoll sras retained as Professor
of Political Econollly; Edmtllld J. Jallles ssras called as Professor
of PulDlic Finance and Aclnlinistl-atioll; and John Bach McMastelo
as Professor of American History, political, constitutiollal and illdustrial,
both beginllillg work in DecemlDer, I883. A fleW era was