3. If you vould have entered this University in any case, svhat
course would you have taken if the School of Commerce had 1lot beela
established ?

I received replies from every one of the students, +^Tith results as
follo+^rs:

Twenty-sis reply that they would not have elltered this or any
other university had not the School of Comulerce beell established.
They would have golle instead directly into btlsiness. Three are Ullcertain,
but state that they zTould have probably taken a special
course in sozne college or university, selectillg such studies as xvould,
in theil- OpilliOIl, best prelDare thenl for business. Of the remainder,
24 xvould have entel-ed our College of Letters alld Science, g the Civic
Historical cotlrse, 8 the General Science course, 5 the Englisil course,
2 the Moclern Classical course. O-f the remainder, 6 +^rould have en
tered the Engineering School, 4 the Law School, and 2 the College of
Agriculture. I interviewed the I2 last melltiolled studellts, and discovered
that ill every case they srould have taken the Engilleerillgy
the Iva+r, or the Agricultural course, not because they wished to make
themselves engineers, lamryers or farmers, but because in the opinion
of themselves or their fathers, these courses furnished a better preparation
for business thall the courses ill the College of Letters and
Science.

It seetns to me that these statistics indicate very clearly the need for
Schools of Commerce. At any rate, +^re are satisfied that in the establishmellt
of the School we have reached a new constituency which has
llot been previously attracted by our University courses."
MONOGRAPHS, PAPERS, AND ADDREDSSEDS ON COMMERCIAIv
EDUCATION

13Y EDAIUND J. JASIES.

I. Das Studitlm der StaatsnvissenschafteIl in Amerika. Conrad's
Jahrbuciler for Nationalokonoulie und Statistik N. F.: VII
Band. Jena, I883.

2. Otltline of a Proposed School of Political and Social Science.
Philadelphia Social Science Association, I885.
3. The Study of Politics and Business at the Ulliversity of PellnsylVallia.
Philadelphia, I 889.

4. Schools of Fillance alld Economy, Address before American
Bankers' Association. Saratoga, I890.

5. Economic and Social Aspects of Public Education. American Illstitute
of Instructioll. BostoIl, I89I.

6. The University alld the Higiler Educatioll of Busilless Ment
Natiollal Educatioll Associatioll. Toronto, I89I.